10-Q 1 mro-20150930x10q.htm 10-Q 10-Q UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C.  20549 FORM 10-Q OR Commission file number 1-5153 Marathon Oil Corporation (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) 5555 San Felipe Street, Houston, TX  77056-2723 (Address of principal executive offices) (713) 629-6600 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.       Yes R No £ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).    Yes R No £ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer or a smaller reporting company.  See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes o No þ There were 677,260,116 shares of Marathon Oil Corporation common stock outstanding as of October 31, 2015 . MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Unless the context otherwise indicates, references to “Marathon Oil,” “we,” “our,” or “us” in this Form 10-Q are references to Marathon Oil Corporation, including its wholly-owned and majority-owned subsidiaries, and its ownership interests in equity method investees (corporate entities, partnerships, limited liability companies and other ventures over which Marathon Oil exerts significant influence by virtue of its ownership interest). For certain industry specific terms used in this Form 10-Q, please see "Definitions" in our 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K. 1 Part I - Financial Information Item 1. Financial Statements MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Consolidated Statements of Income (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements . 2 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements . 3 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Consolidated Balance Sheets (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements . 4 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements . 5 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 1 .    Basis of Presentation These consolidated financial statements are unaudited; however, in the opinion of management, these statements reflect all adjustments necessary for a fair statement of the results for the periods reported.  All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature unless disclosed otherwise.  These consolidated financial statements, including notes, have been prepared in accordance with the applicable rules of the SEC and do not include all of the information and disclosures required by U.S. GAAP for complete financial statements. As a result of the sale of our Angola assets and our Norway business in 2014, both are reflected as discontinued operations.  The disclosures in this report related to results of operations and cash flows are presented on the basis of continuing operations, unless otherwise noted. These interim financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in our 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K.  The results of operations for the third quarter and first nine months of 2015 are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for the full year. 2 .   Accounting Standards Not Yet Adopted In May 2015, the FASB issued an update that removes the requirement to categorize within the fair value hierarchy all investments for which fair value is measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient.  The amendment also removes certain disclosure requirements regarding all investments that are eligible to be measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient and only requires certain disclosures on those investments for which an entity elects to use the net asset value per share expedient.  This standard is effective for us in the first quarter of 2016 and will be applied on a retrospective basis.  Early adoption is permitted.  This standard only modifies disclosure requirements; as such, there will be no impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In April 2015, the FASB issued an update that requires debt issuance costs to be presented in the balance sheet as a direct reduction from the associated debt liability.  This standard is effective for us in the first quarter of 2016 and will be applied on a retrospective basis.  Early adoption is permitted.  We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a significant impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In February 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to the guidance for determining whether an entity is a variable interest entity ("VIE").  The standard does not add or remove any of the five characteristics that determine if an entity is a VIE. However, it does change the manner by which a reporting entity assesses whether the equity holders at risk lack decision making rights if the decision-making over the subject entity’s most significant activities was outsourced.  This standard is effective for us in the first quarter of 2016 and early adoption is permitted.  We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a significant impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In August 2014, the FASB issued an update that requires management to assess an entity’s ability to continue as a going concern by incorporating and expanding upon certain principles that are currently in United States auditing standards.  This standard is effective for us in the first quarter of 2017 and early adoption is permitted.  We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a significant impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In May 2014, the FASB issued an update that supersedes the existing revenue recognition requirements.  This standard includes a five-step revenue recognition model to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.  Among other things, the standard also eliminates industry-specific revenue guidance, requires enhanced disclosures about revenue, provides guidance for transactions that were not previously addressed comprehensively, and improves guidance for multiple-element arrangements.  This standard is effective for us in the first quarter of 2018 and should be applied retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented or with the cumulative effect of initially applying the update recognized at the date of initial application.  Early adoption is permitted with an effective date no earlier than first quarter of 2017.  We are evaluating the provisions of this accounting standards update and assessing the impact, if any, it may have on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. 6 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) Recently Adopted In April 2014, the FASB issued an amendment to accounting standards that changes the criteria for reporting discontinued operations while enhancing related disclosures.  Under the amendment, only disposals representing a strategic shift in operations should be presented as discontinued operations.  Expanded disclosures about the assets, liabilities, income and expenses of discontinued operations are required.  In addition, disclosure of the pretax income attributable to a disposal of a significant part of an organization that does not qualify for discontinued operations reporting will be made in order to provide users with information about the ongoing trends in an organization’s results from continuing operations.  The amendments were effective for us in the first quarter of 2015 and apply to dispositions or classifications as held for sale thereafter.  Adoption of this standard did not impact our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. 3 .   Variable Interest Entity The owners of the Athabasca Oil Sands Project, in which we hold a 20% undivided interest, contracted with a wholly owned subsidiary of a publicly traded Canadian limited partnership (“Corridor Pipeline”) to provide materials transportation capabilities among the Muskeg River and Jackpine mines, the Scotford upgrader and markets in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.  Costs under this contract are accrued and recorded on a monthly basis, with current liabilities of $2 million recorded at September 30, 2015 and $3 million at December 31, 2014.  This contract qualifies as a variable interest contractual arrangement, and the Corridor Pipeline qualifies as a VIE.  We hold a variable interest but are not the primary beneficiary because our shipments are only 20% of the total; therefore, the Corridor Pipeline is not consolidated by us.  Our maximum exposure to loss as a result of our involvement with this VIE is the amount we expect to pay over the contract term, which was $471 million as of September 30, 2015 .  The liability on our books related to this contract at any given time will reflect amounts due for the immediately previous month’s activity, which is substantially less than the maximum exposure over the contract term. Basic income (loss) per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares outstanding.  Diluted income per share assumes exercise of stock options, provided the effect is not antidilutive.  The per share calculations below exclude 13 million and 2 million stock options for the third quarters of 2015 and 2014 and 13 million and 4 million stock options for the first nine months of 2015 and 2014 that were antidilutive. 7 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 2014 - North America E&P Segment In the third quarter of 2014, we acquired acreage in the Oklahoma Resource Basins at a cost of $68 million after final settlement adjustments. 2015 - North America E&P Segment In August 2015, we closed the sale of our East Texas, North Louisiana and Wilburton, Oklahoma natural gas assets for proceeds of approximately $100 million and recorded a pretax loss of $1 million .  During the second quarter of 2015, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $44 million related to these assets (See Note 15 ). 2015 - International E&P Segment In September 2015, we entered into an agreement to sell our East Africa exploration acreage in Ethiopia and Kenya. A pretax loss of $ 109 million was recorded in the third quarter of 2015. This transaction is expected to close during the fourth quarter of 2015. 2014 - North America E&P Segment In the second quarter of 2014, we closed the sale of non-core acreage located in the far northwest portion of Williston Basin for proceeds of $90 million and recorded a pretax loss of $91 million . 2014 - International E&P Segment In the second quarter of 2014, we entered into an agreement to sell our Norway business, including the operated Alvheim floating production, storage and offloading vessel, 10 operated licenses and a number of non-operated licenses on the Norwegian Continental Shelf in the North Sea.  The transaction closed during the fourth quarter of 2014. Our Norway business was reflected as discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of income and the consolidated statements of cash flows for 2014.  Select amounts reported in discontinued operations were as follows: (a) Includes a tax benefit of $26 million related to a decrease in the valuation allowance on U.S. foreign tax credits from the Norway operations. In the first quarter of 2014, we closed the sales of our non-operated 10% working interests in the Production Sharing Contracts and Joint Operating Agreements for Angola Blocks 31 and 32 for aggregate proceeds of approximately $2 billion and recorded a $576 million after-tax gain on sale.  Included in the after-tax gain is a deferred tax benefit reflecting our ability to utilize foreign tax credits that otherwise would have needed a valuation allowance. Our Angola operations are reflected as discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of income and the consolidated statements of cash flows for the prior period.  Select amounts reported in discontinued operations were as follows: 8 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 7 .    Segment Information We are a global energy company with operations in North America, Europe and Africa.  Each of our three reportable operating segments is organized and managed based upon both geographic location and the nature of the products and services it offers. Information regarding assets by segment is not presented because it is not reviewed by the chief operating decision maker (“CODM”).  Segment income represents income from continuing operations excluding certain items not allocated to segments,  net of income taxes attributable to the operating segments.  Our corporate and operations support general and administrative costs are not allocated to the operating segments.  These costs primarily consist of employment costs (including pension effects), professional services, facilities and other costs associated with corporate and operations support activities.  Gains or losses on dispositions, certain impairments, change in tax expense associated with a tax rate change, unrealized gains or losses on crude oil derivative instruments, or other items that affect comparability also are not allocated to operating segments. As discussed in Note 6 , as a result of the sale of our Angola assets and our Norway business in 2014, both are reflected as discontinued operations and excluded from the Int'l E&P segment for 2014. 9 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 10 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 8 .    Defined Benefit Postretirement Plans The following summarizes the components of net periodic benefit cost: 11 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) During the first nine months of 2015 , we recorded the effects of a workforce reduction, a U.S. pension plan amendment and the discontinuation of accruals for future benefits under the U.K. pension plan.  The U.S. pension plan amendment freezes the final average pay used to calculate the benefit under the legacy final average pay formula and was effective July 6, 2015. For the U.K. pension plan, a final decision was reached with the plan trustees to close the plan to future benefit accruals effective December 31, 2015.  Additionally, during the first nine months of 2015 and 2014, we recorded the effects of settlements of our U.S. pension plans.  As required, we remeasured the plans' assets and liabilities as of the applicable balance sheet dates.  The cumulative effects of these events are included in the remeasurement and reflected in both the pension liability and net periodic benefit cost. During the first nine months of 2015 , we made contributions of $65 million to our funded pension plans.  We expect to make additional contributions up to an estimated $18 million to our funded pension plans over the remainder of 2015 .  During the first nine months of 2015 , we made payments of $57 million and $13 million related to unfunded pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans, respectively. 9 .    Income Taxes Effective Tax Rate The effective income tax rate is influenced by a variety of factors including the geographic and functional sources of income and the relative magnitude of these sources of income.  The difference between the total provision (benefit) and the sum of the amounts allocated to segments is reported in the “Not Allocated to Segments” column of the tables in Note 7 . Our effective income tax rates on continuing operations for the first nine months of 2015 and 2014 were 28% and 32% .  The tax provision (benefit) applicable to Libyan ordinary income (loss) was recorded as a discrete item in the first nine months of 2015 and 2014 .  Excluding Libya, the effective tax rates on continuing operations, would be 27% and 32% for the first nine months of 2015 and 2014.  In Libya, uncertainty remains around the timing of future production and sales levels.  Reliable estimates of 2015 and 2014 Libyan annual ordinary income from our operations could not be made and the range of possible scenarios in the worldwide annual effective tax rate calculation demonstrates significant variability.  Thus, for the first nine months of 2015 and 2014 , estimated annual effective tax rates were calculated excluding Libya and applied to consolidated ordinary income (loss). Change in Tax Law On June 29, 2015, the Alberta government enacted legislation to increase the provincial corporate tax rate from 10% to 12% .  As a result of this legislation, we recorded additional non-cash deferred tax expense of $135 million in the second quarter of 2015. Indefinite Reinvestment Assertion In the second quarter of 2015, we reviewed our operations and concluded that we do not have the same level of capital needs outside the U.S. as previously expected.  Therefore, we no longer intend for previously unremitted foreign earnings of 12 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) approximately $1 billion associated with our Canadian operations to be permanently reinvested outside the U.S.  As such, none of Marathon Oil’s foreign earnings remain permanently reinvested abroad.  We anticipate foreign tax credits associated with these Canadian earnings would be sufficient to offset any incremental U.S. tax liabilities, and therefore, no additional net deferred taxes were recorded in the second quarter of 2015. Deferred Tax Assets In connection with our assessment of the realizability of our deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of our deferred tax assets will not be realized.  In the event it is more likely than not that some portion or all of our deferred taxes will not be realized, such assets are reduced by a valuation allowance. Future increases to our valuation allowance are possible if our estimates and assumptions (particularly as they relate to downward revisions of our long-term commodity price forecast) are revised such that they reduce estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period. 10 .    Short-term Investments As of September 30, 2015, our short-term investments are comprised of bank time deposits with original maturities of greater than three months and remaining maturities of less than twelve months.  They are classified as held-to-maturity investments, which are recorded at amortized cost. The carrying values of our short-term investments approximate fair value.  These short-term investments matured during October 2015. 11 .   Inventories Inventories of liquid hydrocarbons, natural gas and bitumen are carried at the lower of cost or market value.  Materials and supplies are valued at weighted average cost and reviewed for obsolescence or impairment when market conditions indicate. 12 .  Property, Plant and Equipment, net of Accumulated Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization Our Libya operations continue to be impacted by civil unrest and, in December 2014, Libya’s National Oil Corporation once again declared force majeure at the Es Sider oil terminal, as disruptions from civil unrest continue.  Considerable uncertainty remains around the timing of future production and sales levels. As of September 30, 2015 , our net property, plant and equipment investment in Libya is $775 million , and total proved reserves (unaudited) in Libya as of December 31, 2014 are 243 million boe. We and our partners in the Waha concessions continue to assess the situation and the condition of our assets in Libya.  Our periodic assessment of the carrying value of our net property, plant and equipment in Libya specifically considers the net investment in the assets, the duration of our concessions and the reserves anticipated to be recoverable in future periods.  The undiscounted cash flows related to our Libya assets continue to exceed the carrying value of $775 million by a material amount. Exploratory well costs capitalized greater than one year after completion of drilling were $88 million and $126 million as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 .  This $38 million net decrease was associated with a write-down of our Canadian in-situ assets at Birchwood in the second quarter of 2015.  After further evaluation of the estimated recoverable 13 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) resources and our development plans, we withdrew our regulatory application for the proposed steam assisted gravity drainage demonstration project at Birchwood. 13 . Other Noncurrent Assets 14 . Impairments and Exploration Expenses The continued decline of commodity prices resulted in a downward revision of our long-term commodity price assumptions and was a triggering event which required us to reassess long-lived assets related to oil and gas producing properties for impairment as of September 30, 2015 .  Further changes in management's forecast assumptions may cause us to reassess our long-lived assets for impairment, and could result in non-cash impairment charges in the future. The following table summarizes impairment charges of proved properties: Impairments for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2015 consisted primarily of proved properties in Colorado and the Gulf of Mexico as a result of lower forecasted commodity prices. Impairments for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2014 consisted primarily of proved properties in the Gulf of Mexico, Texas and North Dakota as a result of revisions to estimated abandonment costs and lower forecasted commodity prices.  See Note 7 for relevant detail regarding segment presentation and Note 15 for fair value measurements related to impairments of proved properties. The following table summarizes the components of exploration expenses: Included in the unproved property impairments for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2015 are non-cash charges of $553 million as a result of changes in our conventional exploration strategy (Gulf of Mexico and Harir block in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq) and lower forecasted commodity prices (Colorado). Unproved property impairments for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2014 primarily consist of leases in Texas and North Dakota that either expired or we decided not to drill or extend.  See Note 7 for relevant detail regarding segment presentation. 14 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 15 .  Fair Value Measurements Fair Values - Recurring The following tables present assets and liabilities accounted for at fair value on a recurring basis as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 by fair value hierarchy level. Commodity derivatives include three-way collars, swaptions, extendable three-way collars and call options.  These instruments are measured at fair value using either the Black-Scholes Model or Black Model.  Inputs to both models include prices, interest rates, and implied volatility.  The inputs to these models are categorized as Level 2 because predominantly all assumptions and inputs are observable in active markets throughout the term of the instruments. Interest rate swaps are measured at fair value with a market approach using actionable broker quotes, which are Level 2 inputs.  See Note 16 for additional discussion of the types of derivative instruments we use. Fair Values - Nonrecurring The following table shows the values of assets, by major category, measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis in periods subsequent to their initial recognition. Commodity prices began declining in the second half of 2014 and remain substantially lower through 2015.  The prolonged decline in commodity prices, and the resulting change in management's future commodity price assumptions, was a triggering event which required us to reassess long-lived assets related to oil and gas producing properties for impairment as of September 30, 2015 .  Further changes in management's forecast assumptions may cause us to reassess our long-lived assets for impairment, and could result in non-cash impairment charges in the future.  Long-lived assets held for use that were impaired are discussed below.  The fair values of each were measured using an income approach based upon internal estimates of future production levels, prices and discount rate, all of which are Level 3 inputs, unless otherwise noted.  Inputs to the fair value measurement include reserve and production estimates made by our reservoir engineers, estimated future commodity prices 15 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) adjusted for quality and location differentials, and forecasted operating expenses for the remaining estimated life of the reservoir. 2015 - North America E&P In the third quarter of 2015, impairments of $333 million were recorded primarily related to certain producing assets in Colorado and the Gulf of Mexico as a result of lower forecasted commodity prices, to an aggregate fair value of $41 million . During the second quarter of 2015, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $44 million related to our East Texas, North Louisiana and Wilburton, Oklahoma natural gas assets as a result of the anticipated sale (see Note 6 ).  The fair values were measured using a probability weighted income approach based on both the anticipated sales price and a held-for-use model. 2015 - International E&P In the third quarter of 2015, a partial impairment of $12 million was recorded to an investment in an equity method investee as a result of lower forecasted commodity prices, to a fair value of $604 million .  This impairment was reflected in income from equity method investments in our consolidated statements of income. 2014 - North America E&P The Ozona development in the Gulf of Mexico ceased producing in 2013, at which time those long-lived assets were fully impaired.  In the first nine months of 2014, we recorded additional impairments of $30 million as a result of estimated abandonment cost revisions. In the third quarter of 2014, impairments of $53 million were recorded to certain other Gulf of Mexico properties as a result of estimated abandonment cost and other revisions, to an aggregate fair value of $19 million .  In addition, two additional on-shore fields were impaired a total of $47 million to an aggregate fair value of $24 million primarily due to lower forecasted commodity prices. Fair Values – Goodwill Unlike long-lived assets, goodwill must be tested for impairment at least annually, or between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.  Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level.  After we performed our annual goodwill impairment test in April 2015, a triggering event (downward revision of forecasted commodity price assumptions) required us to reassess our goodwill for impairment as of September 30, 2015.  Based on the results of this assessment, we concluded no impairment was required.  The fair value of the North America E&P and International E&P reporting units exceeded their respective book values by a significant margin.  Changes in management's forecast commodity price assumptions may cause us to reassess our goodwill for impairment, and could result in non-cash impairment charges in the future. Fair Values – Financial Instruments Our current assets and liabilities include financial instruments, the most significant of which are receivables, short-term investments, long-term debt due within one year, and payables.  We believe the carrying values of our receivables, short-term investments and payables approximate fair value.  Our fair value assessment incorporates a variety of considerations, including (1) the short-term duration of the instruments, (2) our investment-grade credit rating, and (3) our historical incurrence of and expected future insignificant bad debt expense, which includes an evaluation of counterparty credit risk. 16 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) The following table summarizes financial instruments, excluding receivables, short-term investments, payables and derivative financial instruments, and their reported fair value by individual balance sheet line item at September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 . (a) Excludes capital leases. Fair values of our financial assets included in other noncurrent assets, and of our financial liabilities included in other current liabilities and deferred credits and other liabilities, are measured using an income approach and most inputs are internally generated, which results in a Level 3 classification.  Estimated future cash flows are discounted using a rate deemed appropriate to obtain the fair value. Most of our long-term debt instruments are publicly-traded.  A market approach, based upon quotes from major financial institutions, which are Level 2 inputs, is used to measure the fair value of such debt.  The fair value of our debt that is not publicly-traded is measured using an income approach.  The future debt service payments are discounted using the rate at which we currently expect to borrow.  All inputs to this calculation are Level 3. 16 . Derivatives For further information regarding the fair value measurement of derivative instruments, see Note 15 .  All of our interest rate and commodity derivatives are subject to enforceable master netting arrangements or similar agreements under which we may report net amounts. The following tables present the gross fair values of derivative instruments and the reported net amounts where they appear on the consolidated balance sheets as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 . 17 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) Derivatives Designated as Fair Value Hedges The following table presents, by maturity date, information about our interest rate swap agreements as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , including the weighted average, London Interbank Offer Rate (“LIBOR”)-based, floating rate. The pretax effects of derivative instruments designated as hedges of fair value in our consolidated statements of income are summarized in the table below.  The foreign currency forwards were used to hedge the current Norwegian tax liability of our Norway business that was sold in the fourth quarter of 2014.  Those instruments outstanding were transferred to the purchaser of the Norway business upon closing of the sale.  There is no ineffectiveness related to the fair value hedges. Derivatives not Designated as Hedges During the first nine months of 2015, we entered into multiple crude oil derivatives indexed to New York Mercantile Exchange ("NYMEX") WTI related to a portion of our forecasted North America E&P sales through December 2016.  These commodity derivatives consist of three-way collars, extendable three-way collars and call options.  Three way-collars consist of a sold call (ceiling), a purchased put (floor) and a sold put.  The ceiling price is the maximum we will receive for the contract crude oil volumes, the floor is the minimum price we will receive, unless the market price falls below the sold put strike price.  In this case, we receive the NYMEX WTI price plus the difference between the floor and the sold put price.  These commodity derivatives were not designated as hedges and are shown in the table below: 18 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) The impact of these crude oil derivative instruments appears in sales and other operating revenues in our consolidated statements of income and was a net gain of $108 million and $91 million in the third quarter and first nine months 2015 .  There were no crude oil derivative instruments in the first nine months of 2014. On June 1, 2015, we entered into Treasury rate locks, which expired on the same day, to hedge against timing differences as it related to our Notes offering (see Note 18 ).  Following the execution of the Treasury locks, corresponding interest rates increased during the day of June 1.  As a result, the settlement of the Treasury rate locks resulted in a gain of $6 million , which was recognized in net interest and other in our consolidated statements of income. 17 .    Incentive Based Compensation Stock option and restricted stock awards The following table presents a summary of stock option and restricted stock award activity for the first nine months of 2015 : (a) The weighted average grant date fair value of stock option awards granted was $6.84 per share. Stock-based performance unit awards During the first nine months of 2015, we granted 382,335 stock-based performance units to certain officers.  The grant date fair value per unit was $31.77 . 19 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 18 .  Debt Revolving Credit Facility As of September 30, 2015 , we had no borrowings against our revolving credit facility (as amended, the "Credit Facility"), as described below. In May 2015, we amended our $2.5 billion unsecured Credit Facility to increase the facility size by $500 million to a total of $3 billion and extended the maturity date by an additional year such that the Credit Facility now matures in May 2020.  The amendment additionally provides us the ability to request two one-year extensions to the maturity date and an option to increase the commitment amount by up to an additional $500 million , subject to the consent of any increasing lenders.  The sub-facilities for swing-line loans and letters of credit remain unchanged allowing up to an aggregate amount of $100 million and $500 million , respectively.  Fees on the unused commitment of each lender, as well as the borrowing options under the Credit Facility, remain unchanged. The Credit Facility includes a covenant requiring that our ratio of total debt to total capitalization not exceed 65% as of the last day of each fiscal quarter. If an event of default occurs, the lenders holding more than half of the commitments may terminate the commitments under the Credit Facility and require the immediate repayment of all outstanding borrowings and the cash collateralization of all outstanding letters of credit under the Credit Facility. As of September 30, 2015 , we were in compliance with this covenant with a debt-to-capitalization ratio of 30% . Debt Issuance On June 10, 2015, we issued $2 billion aggregate principal amount of unsecured senior notes which consist of the following series: • $600 million of 2.70% senior notes due June 1, 2020 • $900 million of 3.85% senior notes due June 1, 2025 • $500 million of 5.20% senior notes due June 1, 2045 Interest on each series of senior notes is payable semi-annually beginning December 1, 2015. We may redeem some or all of the senior notes at any time at the applicable redemption price, plus accrued interest, if any. The aggregate net proceeds were used to repay our $1 billion 0.90% senior notes that matured in November 2015, and the remainder for general corporate purposes. As of September 30, 2015 , we were in compliance with the covenants under the indenture governing the senior notes. 19 .  Reclassifications Out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) The following table presents a summary of amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) to income (loss) from continuing operations in their entirety: 20 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 20 .  Supplemental Cash Flow Information 21 .   Commitments and Contingencies We are a defendant in a number of lawsuits arising in the ordinary course of business, including, but not limited to, royalty claims, contract claims and environmental claims. While the ultimate outcome and impact to us cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe the resolution of these proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. 21 Item 2. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Executive Overview Outlook Operations Market Conditions Results of Operations Critical Accounting Estimates Cash Flows and Liquidity The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the preceding consolidated financial statements and notes in Item 1. Executive Overview We are an independent global exploration and production company based in Houston, Texas.  Our operations are primarily located in North America, Europe and Africa with a focus on our North American unconventional shale plays.  Total proved reserves were 2.2 billion boe at December 31, 2014 and total assets were $35 billion at September 30, 2015. Our significant financial results, operating activities and strategic actions include the following: • Financial results Subsequent to the end of the third quarter, we reduced our quarterly dividend from $0.21 to $0.05 per share to address the uncertainty of a lower for longer commodity price environment, to align with our priority of maintaining a strong balance sheet through the cycle and to provide us with additional capital flexibility to support growth from the U.S. resource plays when commodity prices improve. 22 Outlook Commodity prices are the most significant factor impacting our revenues, profitability, operating cash flows and the amount of capital available to reinvest into our business.  Commodity prices began declining in the second half of 2014 and remain substantially lower through 2015.  We believe we can manage in this lower commodity price cycle through a continued focus on development in our three U.S. resource plays, operational execution, efficiency improvements, cost reductions, capital discipline and portfolio optimization, all while maintaining financial flexibility. We expect our full-year 2015 capital, investment and exploration budget to be $3.1 billion.  We estimate our full-year North America E&P and International E&P production volumes (excluding Libya) to be 380 - 390 net mboed and OSM's synthetic crude oil production to be 40 - 45 net mboed.  In addition, based on our current outlook and preliminary plan discussions, we would anticipate a 2016 capital, investment and exploration program of up to $2.2 billion which would give us the flexibility to deliver 2016 annual average production in the U.S. resource plays flat to the 2015 exit rate. Exploration Update In September 2015, we announced our intention to scale back our conventional exploration program with an anticipated 2016 program of approximately $100 million, a reduction of 60% as compared to the 2015 budget, subject to approval by our Board of Directors.  Our conventional exploration focus will be redirected to existing commitments in the Gulf of Mexico and Gabon.  As a result, we recorded non-cash impairments related to unproved properties in the Gulf of Mexico and the Harir block in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq in the third quarter. Operations The following table presents a summary of our sales volumes for each of our segments.  Refer to the Results of Operations for a price-volume analysis for each of the segments. (a) Includes blendstocks North America E&P--Net Sales Volumes Net sales volumes in the North America E&P segment increased as a result of continued growth from the combined U.S. resource plays.  The following table provides net sales volumes for our significant operational areas within this segment. The following table provides our sales mix for each of our U.S. resource plays. The following table presents a summary of our operated drilling activity in the U.S. resource plays: North America E&P--Exploration 24 International E&P--Net Sales Volumes The following table provides net sales volumes for our significant operational areas within this segment. Oil Sands Mining Our net synthetic crude oil sales volumes were 65 mbbld and 51 mbbld in the third quarter and first nine months of 2015 compared to 55 mbbld and 49 mbbld in the same periods of 2014 .  Net sales volumes increased in the third quarter of 2015 primarily due to improved mine reliability and no major maintenance activities.  Planned maintenance at both mines in the fourth quarter of 2015 is expected to impact production. We hold a 20% non-operated working interest in the Athabasca Oil Sands Project. 25 Market Conditions Prevailing prices for the crude oil, NGLs and natural gas that we produce significantly impact our revenues and cash flows.   The benchmark prices for crude oil, NGLs and natural gas were significantly lower in the third quarter and first nine months of 2015 as compared to the same periods in 2014; as a result, we experienced significant declines in our price realizations associated with those benchmarks.  Additional detail on market conditions, including our average price realizations and benchmarks for crude oil, NGLs and natural gas relative to our operating segments, follows. North America E&P The following table presents our average price realizations and the related benchmarks for crude oil, NGLs and natural gas for the third quarter and first nine months of 2015 and 2014 . Crude oil and condensate – Our crude oil and condensate price realizations may differ from the benchmark due to the quality and location of the product. Natural gas liquids – The majority of our NGL volumes are sold at reference to Mont Belvieu prices. Natural gas – A significant portion of our natural gas production in the U.S. is sold at bid-week prices, or first-of-month indices relative to our specific producing areas. International E&P The following table presents our average price realizations and the related benchmark for crude oil, NGLs, and natural gas for the third quarter and first nine months of 2015 and 2014 . Liquid hydrocarbons – Our U.K. liquid hydrocarbon production is generally sold in relation to the Brent crude benchmark.  Our production from Equatorial Guinea is condensate, which receives lower prices than crude oil. 26 Our NGL and natural gas sales in the International E&P segment originate primarily from our E.G. operations and are sold to our equity method investees under fixed-price, term contracts; therefore, our reported average realized prices for NGLs and natural gas will not fully track market price movements.  The equity affiliates then utilize, process and sell the NGLs and natural gas at market prices, with our share of their income/loss reflected in the Income from equity method investments line item on the Consolidated Statements of Income. Oil Sands Mining The Oil Sands Mining segment produces and sells various qualities of synthetic crude oil.  Output mix can be impacted by operational reliability or planned unit outages at the mines or upgrader.  Sales prices for roughly two-thirds of the normal output mix have historically tracked movements in WTI and one-third have historically tracked movements in the Canadian heavy crude oil marker, primarily WCS. The following table presents our average price realizations and the related benchmarks for the third quarter and first nine months of 2015 and 2014 . 27 Results of Operations Three Months Ended September 30, 2015 vs. Three Months Ended September 30, 2014 Sales and other operating revenues, including related party are presented by segment in the table below: Below is a price/volume analysis for each segment.  Refer to the preceding Operations and Market Conditions sections for additional detail related to our net sales volumes and average price realizations. Marketing revenues decreased $470 million in the third quarter of 2015 from the comparable prior-year period.  Marketing activities include the purchase of commodities from third parties for resale and serve to aggregate volumes in order to satisfy transportation commitments as well as to achieve flexibility within product types and delivery points.  Since the volume of marketing activity is based on market dynamics, it can fluctuate from period to period.  The decreases are related primarily to lower marketed volumes in North America, which were further compounded by a lower commodity price environment. Income from equity method investments decreased $ 53 million in the third quarter of 2015 from the comparable 2014 period. The decrease is primarily due to lower price realizations for LPG at our Alba plant, LNG at our LNG facility, and lower methanol prices at our AMPCO methanol facility, all of which are located in E.G.  Also impacting the quarter was a partial impairment of our investment in an equity method investee. Production expenses decreased $187 million .  North America E&P declined $54 million due to lower operational, maintenance and labor costs.  International E&P declined $47 million primarily the result of higher project costs in 2014, such as the non-operated Foinaven subsea power project.  Also contributing were lower production costs in Libya during 2015 as the third quarter of 2014 had one lifting.  OSM decreased $86 million primarily due to continued cost management, especially staffing and contract labor.  Also contributing to the OSM decrease was a more favorable exchange rate on expenses denominated in the Canadian Dollar and lower feedstock purchases given increased reliability. 28 The third quarter of 2015 production expense rate (expense per boe) for North America E&P declined due to overall cost reductions, as previously discussed, and leveraging efficiencies as production volumes increased.  The expense rate for International E&P declined due to reduced maintenance and project costs and lower operational costs in Libya.  The OSM expense rate decreased as production volume increased, coupled with the increased cost focus discussed above. The following table provides production expense rates for each segment: Marketing costs decreased $470 million in the third quarter of 2015 from the comparable 2014 period, consistent with the marketing revenues changes discussed above. Exploration expenses increased $489 million .  We made a strategic decision to reduce the overall level of our conventional exploration program; as a result, we impaired certain of our leases in the Gulf of Mexico and the Harir block in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq.  Further contributing to the increase was an impairment of unproved property in Colorado, which we deemed uneconomic given our forecasted natural gas prices.  The following table summarizes the components of exploration expenses: Depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”) decreased $20 million primarily as a result of a higher proved reserve base in Eagle Ford, the effects of which more than offset additional DD&A resulting from production volume increases in the International E&P and OSM segments. Our segments apply the units-of-production method to the majority of their assets, including capitalized asset retirement costs; therefore, proved reserve and production volumes have an impact on DD&A expense. The DD&A rate (expense per boe), which is impacted by field-level changes in sales volumes, proved reserves and capitalized costs, can also cause changes to our DD&A. The following table provides DD&A rates for each segment.  The DD&A rate for North America E&P decreased primarily as a result of a higher proved reserve base in Eagle Ford.  The International E&P rate increased primarily due to higher sales volumes from the Brae infill drilling program. Impairments are discussed in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements. 29 Taxes other than income include production, severance and ad valorem taxes, primarily in the U.S., which tend to increase or decrease in relation to revenue and sales volumes.  With the decrease in North America E&P revenues due to lower price realizations, taxes other than income decreased $ 69 million in the third quarter of 2015 .  This decrease was partially offset by an increase in sales volumes in North America E&P.  The following table summarizes the components of taxes other than income: General and administrative expenses decreased $35 million primarily due to cost savings realized from the workforce reductions that occurred in the first quarter of 2015.  Pension settlement charges in the three months of 2015 totaled $18 million compared to $22 million in the prior year.  In addition, we incurred severance related expenses in the first three months of 2015 associated with workforce reductions of $4 million. Provision (benefit) for income taxes reflects an effective tax rate of 35% in the third quarter of 2015 , as compared to 33% in the third quarter of 2014 . See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of the effective tax rate. Discontinued operations presented in 2014 are net of tax.  See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for financial information about discontinued operations. Segment Income (Loss) Segment income (loss) represents income (loss) from continuing operations excluding certain items not allocated to segments, net of income taxes, attributable to the operating segments.  Our corporate and operations support general and administrative costs are not allocated to the operating segments.  Gains or losses on dispositions, certain impairments, unrealized gains or losses on crude oil derivative instruments, or other items that affect comparability also are not allocated to operating segments. The following table reconciles segment income (loss) to net income (loss): North America E&P segment income (loss) decreased $353 million after-tax primarily due to lower price realizations, which was partially offset by the impacts from the increased net sales volumes from the U.S. resource plays and lower production and operating costs. International E&P segment income decreased $77 million after-tax primarily due to lower liquid hydrocarbon price realizations as well as reduced income from equity investments.  These declines were partially offset by increased sales volumes and lower production and exploration expenses. Oil Sands Mining segment income (loss) decreased $104 million after-tax primarily due to lower price realizations, partially offset by higher volumes and reduced production expenses. 30 Results of Operations Nine Months Ended September 30, 2015 vs. Nine Months Ended September 30, 2014 Sales and other operating revenues, including related party are presented by segment in the table below: Below is a price/volume analysis for each segment.  Refer to the preceding Operations and Market Conditions sections for additional detail related to our net sales volumes and average price realizations. Marketing revenues decreased $1,242 million .  Marketing activities include the purchase of commodities from third parties for resale and serve to aggregate volumes in order to satisfy transportation commitments as well as to achieve flexibility within product types and delivery points.  Since the volume of marketing activity is based on market dynamics, it can fluctuate from period to period.  The decreases are related primarily to lower marketed volumes in North America, which were further compounded by a lower commodity price environment. Income from equity method investments decreased $248 million primarily due to lower price realizations for LPG at our Alba Plant, LNG at our LNG facility and lower methanol prices at our AMPCO methanol facility, all of which are located in E.G.  Also contributing to the decrease in 2015 were lower sales volumes due to the planned turnaround and maintenance activities at the AMPCO methanol plant, the Alba field and the LNG facility. Production expenses for the first nine months of 2015 decreased by $397 million .  North America E&P declined $101 million due to lower operational, maintenance and labor costs.  International E&P declined $115 million due to lower project work, repair, maintenance and turnaround costs as well as slightly lower production volumes.  OSM declined $181 million primarily due to continued cost management, especially staffing and contract labor.  Also contributing to the OSM decrease are lower feedstock purchases given increased reliability and a more favorable exchange rate on expenses denominated in the Canadian Dollar. 31 The expense rates during the first nine months of 2015 decreased for each of our segments as total production costs declined due to the reasons described in the preceding paragraph.  The North America E&P and OSM segments also experienced volume increases, which further contributed to the expense rate decline.  The following table provides production expense rates for each segment: Marketing costs decreased $1,239 million in the first nine months of 2015 from the comparable 2014 period, consistent with the marketing revenues changes discussed above. Exploration expenses increased by $472 million as a result of unproved property impairments recognized during the third quarter of 2015.  See the preceding three month period discussion for further information on our unproved property impairments.  Unproved property impairments in 2014 primarily were a result of Eagle Ford and Bakken leases that either expired or that we decided not to drill or extend.  Dry well costs for the first nine months of 2015 include the Sodalita West #1 well in E.G., the Key Largo well in the Gulf of Mexico, and suspended well costs related to Birchwood in-situ that were expensed during the second quarter of 2015.  Dry well costs for the first nine months of 2014 primarily consist of our exploration programs in Kurdistan, Ethiopia and Kenya.  The following table summarizes the components of exploration expenses: Depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”) increased $229 million primarily as a result of higher North America E&P net sales volumes from our three U.S. resource plays.  Our segments apply the units-of-production method to the majority of their assets, including capitalized asset retirement costs; therefore, proved reserve and production volumes have an impact on DD&A expense. The DD&A rate (expense per boe), which is impacted by field-level changes in sales volumes, proved reserves and capitalized costs, can also cause changes to our DD&A.  The following table provides DD&A rates for each segment. Impairments are discussed in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements. 32 Taxes other than income include production, severance and ad valorem taxes, primarily in the U.S., which tend to increase or decrease in relation to revenue and sales volumes.  With the decrease in North America E&P revenues due to lower price realizations, taxes other than income decreased $128 million in the first nine months of 2015 . This decrease was partially offset by an increase in sales volumes in North America E&P.  The following table summarizes the components of taxes other than income: General and administrative expenses decreased $22 million primarily due to cost savings realized from the workforce reductions that occurred in the first quarter of 2015.  This decrease was partially offset by $47 million of severance related expenses.  The first nine months of 2015 include $99 million of pension settlement expense as compared to $93 million for the previous year. Provision (benefit) for income taxes reflects an effective tax rate of 28% in the first nine months of 2015 , as compared to 32% in the comparable 2014 period.  The effective rate for 2015 reflects a $135 million non-cash deferred tax expense recorded in the second quarter of 2015 as a result of enacted corporate tax changes in Alberta, Canada.  See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of the effective tax rate. Discontinued operations presented in 2014 are net of tax.  See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for financial information about discontinued operations. Segment Income (Loss) Segment income (loss) represents income (loss) from continuing operations excluding certain items not allocated to segments, net of income taxes, attributable to the operating segments.  Our corporate and operations support general and administrative costs are not allocated to the operating segments.  Gains or losses on dispositions, certain impairments, change in tax expense associated with a tax rate change, unrealized gains or losses on crude oil derivative instruments, or other items that affect comparability also are not allocated to operating segments. The following table reconciles segment income (loss) to net income (loss): North America E&P segment income (loss) decreased $1,103 million after-tax in the first nine months of 2015 primarily due to lower price realizations; these were partially offset by increased net sales volumes from the U.S. resource plays and lower production costs. International E&P segment income decreased $394 million after-tax primarily due to lower liquid hydrocarbon price realizations and reduced income from equity investments.  These declines were partially offset by lower production and exploration expenses. Oil Sands Mining segment income (loss) decreased $319 million after-tax primarily due to lower price realizations, partially offset by reduced production expenses. 33 Critical Accounting Estimates There have been no material changes or developments in the evaluation of the accounting estimates and the underlying assumptions or methodologies pertaining to our Critical Accounting Estimates disclosed in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014, except as discussed below. Fair Value Estimates - Impairment Assessments of Long-Lived Assets and Goodwill The continued decline of commodity prices resulted in a downward revision of our long-term commodity price assumptions and was a triggering event which required us to reassess long-lived assets related to oil and gas producing properties for impairment as of September 30, 2015.  We estimated the fair values using an income approach and concluded that impairments of $337 million were required (See Notes 14 & 15 ).  Changes in management's forecast assumptions may cause us to reassess our long-lived assets for impairment, and could result in non-cash impairment charges in the future. Unlike long-lived assets, goodwill must be tested for impairment at least annually, or between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.  Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level.  After we performed our annual goodwill impairment test in April 2015, a triggering event (downward revision to forecasted commodity price assumptions) required us to reassess our goodwill for impairment as of September 30, 2015.  Based on the results of this assessment, we concluded no impairment was required.  The fair value of the North America E&P and International E&P reporting units exceeded their respective book values by a significant margin.  Changes in management's forecast commodity price assumptions may cause us to reassess our goodwill for impairment, and could result in non-cash impairment charges in the future. Income Tax Estimates - Deferred Tax Assets In connection with our assessment of the realizability of our deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of our deferred tax assets will not be realized.  In the event it is more likely than not that some portion or all of our deferred taxes will not be realized, such assets are reduced by a valuation allowance. Future increases to our valuation allowance are possible if our estimates and assumptions (particularly as they relate to downward revisions of our long-term commodity price forecast) are revised such that they reduce estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period. Accounting Standards Not Yet Adopted See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements. 34 Cash Flows and Liquidity Cash Flows The following table presents sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents Commodity prices began declining in the second half of 2014 and remain substantially lower through 2015. This lower price trend adversely impacted our cash flows in 2015. Partially offsetting the decline in prices were increased net sales volumes in the North America E&P and OSM segments.  While we are unable to predict future commodity price movements, if this lower price environment continues, it would continue to negatively impact our cash flows from operating activities as compared to the previous year. Borrowings reflect net proceeds received from the issuance of senior notes in June 2015.  See Liquidity and Capital Resources below for additional information. Cash flows from discontinued operations are primarily related to our Norway business, which we disposed of in the fourth quarter of 2014.  Disposal of assets in 2015 pertain to the August 2015 sale of our East Texas, North Louisiana and Wilburton, Oklahoma natural gas assets.  Disposals of assets in 2014 primarily reflect the net proceeds from the sales of our Angola assets.  Disposition transactions are discussed in further detail in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements. In October, 2015, we announced an adjustment to our quarterly dividend.  See Capital Requirements below for additional information. Certain of our short-term investments matured in September 2015.  Purchases of short-term investments in 2015 were made from proceeds received from the senior notes issuance in June 2015.  The investments consisted of time deposits with maturity dates ranging from September - October 2015. 35 Additions to property, plant and equipment are our most significant use of cash and cash equivalents.  The following table shows capital expenditures by segment and reconciles to additions to property, plant and equipment in continuing operations as presented in the consolidated statements of cash flows: During the first nine months of 2014 , we acquired 29 million common shares at a cost of $1 billion under our share repurchase program.  There were no stock repurchases during 2015. Liquidity and Capital Resources On June 10, 2015, we issued $2 billion aggregate principal amount of unsecured senior notes which consist of the following series: • $600 million of 2.70% senior notes due June 1, 2020 • $900 million of 3.85% senior notes due June 1, 2025 • $500 million of 5.20% senior notes due June 1, 2045 Interest on each series of senior notes is payable semi-annually beginning December 1, 2015. We used the aggregate net proceeds to repay our $1 billion 0.90% senior notes on November 2, 2015, and the remainder for general corporate purposes. In May 2015, we amended our $2.5 billion Credit Facility to increase the facility size by $500 million to a total of $3 billion and extend the maturity date by an additional year such that the Credit Facility now matures in May 2020.  The amendment additionally provides us the ability to request two one-year extensions to the maturity date and an option to increase the commitment amount by up to an additional $500 million, subject to the consent of any increasing lenders.  The sub-facilities for swing-line loans and letters of credit remain unchanged allowing up to an aggregate amount of $100 million and $500 million, respectively.  Fees on the unused commitment of each lender, as well as the borrowing options under the Credit Facility, remain unchanged. Our main sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, internally generated cash flow from operations, the issuance of notes, our $3 billion Credit Facility and sales of non-core assets.  Our working capital requirements are supported by these sources and we may also issue commercial paper, which is backed by our revolving credit facility.  Furthermore, we actively manage our capital spending program, including the level and timing of activities associated with our drilling programs.  Because of the alternatives available to us as discussed above, and access to capital markets through the shelf registration discussed below, we believe that our liquidity is adequate to fund not only our current operations, but also our funding requirements for the foreseeable future, including our capital spending programs, dividend payments, defined benefit plan contributions, repayment of debt maturities, and other amounts that may ultimately be paid in connection with contingencies. 36 Capital Resources Credit Arrangements and Borrowings At September 30, 2015 , we had no borrowings against our revolving credit facility and no amounts outstanding under our U.S. commercial paper program that is backed by the revolving credit facility. At September 30, 2015 , we had $8.4 billion in long-term debt outstanding, of which approximately $1.0 billion matured and was repaid in November 2015.  We utilized cash on hand and proceeds from the maturities of our short-term investments to fund the debt payment. We do not have any triggers on any of our corporate debt that would cause an event of default in the case of a downgrade of our credit ratings. Shelf Registration We have a universal shelf registration statement filed with the SEC under which we, as a "well-known seasoned issuer" for purposes of SEC rules, have the ability to issue and sell an indeterminate amount of various types of equity and debt securities. Asset Disposals We are targeting to generate at least $500 million from select non-core asset sales. During the third quarter of 2015, we closed the sale of our East Texas, North Louisiana and Wilburton, Oklahoma natural gas assets for proceeds of approximately $100 million and announced the sale of our Kenya and Ethiopia exploration acreage.  See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for additional discussion of these dispositions. Cash and Short-Term Investments-Adjusted Debt-To-Capital Ratio Our cash and short-term investments-adjusted debt-to-capital ratio (total debt-minus-cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments to total debt-plus-equity-minus-cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments) was 24% at September 30, 2015 , compared to 16% at December 31, 2014 . Capital Requirements We expect our revised total capital, investment and exploration spending budget for full-year 2015 to be $3.1 billion which is $200 million less than our previous budget. On October 28, 2015, our Board of Directors approved a dividend of $0.05 per share for the third quarter of 2015 payable December 10, 2015 to stockholders of record at the close of business on November 18, 2015.   This dividend represents a reduction from the previous quarterly dividend of $0.21 per share as we continue to address the uncertainty of a lower for longer commodity price environment, align with our priority of maintaining a strong balance sheet through the cycle, and provide additional capital flexibility to support growth from the U.S. resource plays when commodity prices improve. As of September 30, 2015 , we plan to make contributions of up to $18 million to our funded pension plans during the remainder of 2015. 37 Contractual Cash Obligations As of September 30, 2015 , there are no material changes to our consolidated cash obligations to make future payments under existing contracts, as disclosed in our 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K, except for our issuance of $2 billion aggregate principal amount of unsecured senior notes, as more fully described in Note 18 . Environmental Matters We have incurred and will continue to incur capital, operating and maintenance, and remediation expenditures as a result of environmental laws and regulations.  If these expenditures, as with all costs, are not ultimately reflected in the prices of our products and services, our operating results will be adversely affected.  We believe that substantially all of our competitors must comply with similar environmental laws and regulations.  However, the specific impact on each competitor may vary depending on a number of factors, including the age and location of its operating facilities, marketing areas and production processes. There have been no significant changes to our environmental matters subsequent to December 31, 2014 . Other Contingencies We are a defendant in a number of lawsuits arising in the ordinary course of business, including, but not limited to, royalty claims, contract claims and environmental claims.  While the ultimate outcome and impact to us cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe the resolution of these proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Forward-Looking Statements This report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "Exchange Act"). All statements other than statements of historical fact included or incorporated by reference in this report are forward-looking statements, including without limitation statements regarding: our operational, financial and growth strategies, including planned projects, drilling plans, maintenance activities, asset sales, productivity improvements, and drilling and completion efficiencies; our ability to effect those strategies and the expected timing and results thereof; our financial and operational outlook and ability to fulfill that outlook; expectations regarding future economic and market conditions and their effects on our business; our 2015 and 2016 capital, investment and exploration programs, including planned allocation and reductions, and the expected benefits thereof; our declared dividend and the expected benefits thereof; our financial position, liquidity and capital resources; production guidance; and the plans and objectives of our management for our future operations. In addition, many forward-looking statements may be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “target,” “plan,” “project,” “could,” “may,” “should,” “would” or similar words indicating that future outcomes are uncertain. While we believe that our assumptions concerning future events are reasonable, a number of factors could cause results to differ materially from those indicated by such forward-looking statements including, but not limited to: All forward-looking statements included in this report are based on information available to us on the date of this report. Except as required by law, we assume no duty or obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. 38 Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk For a detailed discussion of our risk management strategies and our derivative instruments, see Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk in our 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K.  Additional disclosures regarding our open derivative positions, including underlying notional quantities, how they are reported in our consolidated financial statements and how their fair values are measured, may be found in Notes 15 and 16 to the consolidated financial statements. Commodity Price Risk During the first nine months of 2015, we entered into crude oil derivatives, indexed to NYMEX WTI, related to a portion of our forecasted North America E&P sales.  The table below provides a summary of open positions as of September 30, 2015 : The following table provides a sensitivity analysis of the projected incremental effect on income (loss) from operations of a hypothetical 10% change in NYMEX WTI prices on our open commodity derivative instruments as of September 30, 2015 . Interest Rate Risk Sensitivity analysis of the incremental effect of a hypothetical 10 percent change in interest rates on financial assets and liabilities as of September 30, 2015 , is provided in the following table. 39 Item 4. Controls and Procedures An evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act) was carried out under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer.  As of the end of the period covered by this Report based upon that evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that the design and operation of these disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of September 30, 2015 . During the third quarter of 2015 , there were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act) that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 40 Part II – OTHER INFORMATION Item 1. Legal Proceedings We are a defendant in a number of lawsuits arising in the ordinary course of business, including, but not limited to, royalty claims, contract claims and environmental claims.  While the ultimate outcome and impact to us cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe the resolution of these proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Item 1A. Risk Factors We are subject to various risks and uncertainties in the course of our business.  There have been no material changes to the risk factors under Item 1A. Risk Factors in our 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K. Item 2. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds The following table provides information about purchases by Marathon Oil during the quarter ended September 30, 2015 , of equity securities that are registered by Marathon Oil pursuant to Section 12 of the Exchange Act of 1934. Item 5. Other Information As we previously disclosed in a Form 8-K filed with the SEC on August 28, 2015, our Board of Directors amended and restated our By-laws, effective September 1, 2015, to modify the existing proxy access provisions of the By-laws to coincide with the stockholder proposal that was approved at our 2015 annual meeting of stockholders. Pursuant to these amendments, the required ownership percentage needed to use the proxy access provisions was decreased to 3% of Marathon Oil’s outstanding common stock, owned continuously for at least three years. Additionally, the maximum number of stockholder nominees that may be included in the proxy statement pursuant to these provisions was increased to 25% of the number of directors in office as of the last day on which notice requesting proxy access may be delivered by an eligible stockholder. Item 6.  Exhibits The information required by this Item 6 is set forth in the Exhibit Index accompanying this Form 10-Q. 41 SIGNATURES Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized. 42 Exhibit Index