10-Q 1 mro-20150630x10q.htm 10-Q MRO-2015.06.30-10Q UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C.  20549 FORM 10-Q OR Commission file number 1-5153 Marathon Oil Corporation (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) 5555 San Felipe Street, Houston, TX  77056-2723 (Address of principal executive offices) (713) 629-6600 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.       Yes R No £ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).    Yes R No £ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer or a smaller reporting company.  See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes o No þ There were 677,184,913 shares of Marathon Oil Corporation common stock outstanding as of July 31, 2015 . MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Unless the context otherwise indicates, references to “Marathon Oil,” “we,” “our,” or “us” in this Form 10-Q are references to Marathon Oil Corporation, including its wholly-owned and majority-owned subsidiaries, and its ownership interests in equity method investees (corporate entities, partnerships, limited liability companies and other ventures over which Marathon Oil exerts significant influence by virtue of its ownership interest). 1 Part I - Financial Information Item 1. Financial Statements MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Consolidated Statements of Income (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements . 2 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements . 3 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Consolidated Balance Sheets (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements . 4 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements . 5 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 1.    Basis of Presentation These consolidated financial statements are unaudited; however, in the opinion of management, these statements reflect all adjustments necessary for a fair statement of the results for the periods reported.  All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature unless disclosed otherwise.  These consolidated financial statements, including notes, have been prepared in accordance with the applicable rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") and do not include all of the information and disclosures required by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("U.S. GAAP") for complete financial statements. As a result of the sale of our Angola assets and our Norway business in 2014, both are reflected as discontinued operations.  The disclosures in this report related to results of operations and cash flows are presented on the basis of continuing operations, unless otherwise noted. These interim financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in the Marathon Oil Corporation 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K.  The results of operations for the second quarter and first six months of 2015 are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for the full year. 2.   Accounting Standards Not Yet Adopted In May 2015, the FASB issued an update that removes the requirement to categorize within the fair value hierarchy all investments for which fair value is measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient.  The amendment also removes certain disclosure requirements regarding all investments that are eligible to be measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient and only requires certain disclosures on those investments for which an entity elects to use the net asset value per share expedient.  This standard is effective for us in the first quarter of 2016 and will be applied on a retrospective basis.  Early adoption is permitted.  This standard only modifies disclosure requirements; as such, there will be no impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In April 2015, the FASB issued an update that requires debt issuance costs to be presented in the balance sheet as a direct reduction from the associated debt liability.  This standard is effective for us in the first quarter of 2016 and will be applied on a retrospective basis.  Early adoption is permitted, including in interim periods.  We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a significant impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In February 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to the guidance for determining whether an entity is a variable interest entity ("VIE").  The standard does not add or remove any of the five characteristics that determine if an entity is a VIE. However, it does change the manner in which a reporting entity assesses one of the characteristics.  In particular, when decision-making over the entity’s most significant activities has been outsourced, the standard changes how a reporting entity assesses if the equity holders at risk lack decision making rights.  This standard is effective for us in the first quarter of 2016 and early adoption is permitted, including in interim periods.  We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a significant impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In August 2014, the FASB issued an update that requires management to assess an entity’s ability to continue as a going concern by incorporating and expanding upon certain principles that are currently in United States ("U.S.") auditing standards.  This standard is effective for us in the first quarter of 2017 and early adoption is permitted.  We do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a significant impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In May 2014, the FASB issued an update that supersedes the existing revenue recognition requirements.  This standard includes a five-step revenue recognition model to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.  Among other things, the standard also eliminates industry-specific revenue guidance, requires enhanced disclosures about revenue, provides guidance for transactions that were not previously addressed comprehensively, and improves guidance for multiple-element arrangements.  This standard is effective for us in the first quarter of 2018 and should be applied retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented or with the cumulative effect of initially applying the update recognized at the date of initial application.  Early adoption is permitted with an effective date no earlier than first quarter of 2017.  We are evaluating the provisions of this accounting standards update and assessing the impact, if any, it may have on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. 6 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) Recently Adopted In April 2014, the FASB issued an amendment to accounting standards that changes the criteria for reporting discontinued operations while enhancing related disclosures.  Under the amendment, only disposals representing a strategic shift in operations should be presented as discontinued operations.  Expanded disclosures about the assets, liabilities, income and expenses of discontinued operations are required.  In addition, disclosure of the pretax income attributable to a disposal of a significant part of an organization that does not qualify for discontinued operations reporting will be made in order to provide users with information about the ongoing trends in an organization’s results from continuing operations.  The amendments were effective for us in the first quarter of 2015 and apply to dispositions or classifications as held for sale thereafter.  Adoption of this standard did not impact our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. 3.   Variable Interest Entity The owners of the Athabasca Oil Sands Project ("AOSP"), in which we hold a 20% undivided interest, contracted with a wholly owned subsidiary of a publicly traded Canadian limited partnership (“Corridor Pipeline”) to provide materials transportation capabilities among the Muskeg River and Jackpine mines, the Scotford upgrader and markets in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.  Costs under this contract are accrued and recorded on a monthly basis, with current liabilities of $2 million recorded at June 30, 2015 and $3 million at December 31, 2014.  This contract qualifies as a variable interest contractual arrangement, and the Corridor Pipeline qualifies as a VIE.  We hold a variable interest but are not the primary beneficiary because our shipments are only 20% of the total; therefore, the Corridor Pipeline is not consolidated by us.  Our maximum exposure to loss as a result of our involvement with this VIE is the amount we expect to pay over the contract term, which was $508 million as of June 30, 2015 .  The liability on our books related to this contract at any given time will reflect amounts due for the immediately previous month’s activity, which is substantially less than the maximum exposure over the contract term. Basic income (loss) per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares outstanding.  Diluted income (loss) per share assumes exercise of stock options, provided the effect is not antidilutive.  The per share calculations below exclude 13 million and 5 million stock options for the second quarters of 2015 and 2014 and 13 million and 4 million stock options for the first six months of 2015 and 2014 that were antidilutive. 7 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 2015 - North America E&P Segment In July 2015, we entered into an agreement to sell our East Texas/North Louisiana and Wilburton, Oklahoma natural gas assets for expected proceeds of $102 million , excluding closing adjustments.  We expect the transaction to close during the third quarter of 2015. 2014 - North America E&P Segment In June 2014, we closed the sale of non-core acreage located in the far northwest portion of Williston Basin for proceeds of $90 million . A pretax loss of $91 million was recorded in the second quarter of 2014. 2014 - International E&P Segment In the second quarter of 2014, we entered into an agreement to sell our Norway business, including the operated Alvheim floating production, storage and offloading vessel, 10 operated licenses and a number of non-operated licenses on the Norwegian Continental Shelf in the North Sea.  The transaction closed during the fourth quarter of 2014. Our Norway business was reflected as discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of income and the consolidated statements of cash flows for 2014.  Select amounts reported in discontinued operations follow: (a) Includes a tax benefit of $26 million related to a decrease in the valuation allowance on U.S. foreign tax credits from the Norway operations. In the first quarter of 2014, we closed the sales of our non-operated 10% working interests in the Production Sharing Contracts and Joint Operating Agreements for Angola Blocks 31 and 32 for aggregate proceeds of approximately $2 billion and recorded a $576 million after-tax gain on sale.  Included in the after-tax gain is a deferred tax benefit reflecting our ability to utilize foreign tax credits that otherwise would have needed a valuation allowance. Our Angola operations are reflected as discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of income and the consolidated statements of cash flows for the prior period.  Select amounts reported in discontinued operations follow: 6.    Segment Information We are a global energy company with operations in North America, Europe and Africa.  Each of our three reportable operating segments is organized and managed based upon both geographic location and the nature of the products and services it offers. 8 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) Information regarding assets by segment is not presented because it is not reviewed by the chief operating decision maker (“CODM”).  Segment income represents income from continuing operations excluding certain items not allocated to segments,  net of income taxes attributable to the operating segments.  Our corporate and operations support general and administrative costs are not allocated to the operating segments.  These costs primarily consist of employment costs (including pension effects), professional services, facilities and other costs associated with corporate and operations support activities.  Gains or losses on dispositions, certain impairments, change in tax expense associated with a tax rate change, unrealized gains or losses on crude oil derivative instruments, or other items that affect comparability also are not allocated to operating segments. As discussed in Note 5, as a result of the sale of our Angola assets and our Norway business in 2014, both are reflected as discontinued operations and excluded from the International E&P segment for 2014. 9 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 10 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 7.    Defined Benefit Postretirement Plans The following summarizes the components of net periodic benefit cost (credit): 11 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) During the first six months of 2015, we recorded the effects of a workforce reduction and a pension plan amendment.  The pension plan amendment freezes the final average pay used to calculate the formula benefit and is effective July 6, 2015. Additionally, during the first six months of 2015 and 2014, we recorded the effects of partial settlements of our U.S. pension plans.  As required, we remeasured the plans' assets and liabilities as of the applicable balance sheet dates.  The cumulative effects of these events are included in the remeasurement and reflected in both the pension liability and net periodic benefit cost (credit). During the first six months of 2015 , we made contributions of $46 million to our funded pension plans.  We expect to make additional contributions up to an estimated $42 million to our funded pension plans over the remainder of 2015 .  During the first six months of 2015 , we made payments of $42 million and $8 million related to unfunded pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans, respectively. 8.    Income Taxes The effective income tax rate is influenced by a variety of factors including the geographic and functional sources of income and the relative magnitude of these sources of income.  The difference between the total provision (benefits) and the sum of the amounts allocated to segments is reported in the “Not Allocated to Segments” column of the tables in Note 6 . Our effective income tax rates on continuing operations for the first six months of 2015 and 2014 were 18% and 32% .  The tax provision (benefit) applicable to Libyan ordinary income (loss) was recorded as a discrete item in the first six months of 2015 and 2014 .  Excluding Libya, the effective tax rates on continuing operations, would be 15% and 34% for the first six months of 2015 and 2014.  In Libya, uncertainty remains around the timing of future production and sales levels.  Reliable estimates of 2015 and 2014 Libyan annual ordinary income from our operations could not be made and the range of possible scenarios in the worldwide annual effective tax rate calculation demonstrates significant variability.  Thus, for the first six months of 2015 and 2014 , estimated annual effective tax rates were calculated excluding Libya and applied to consolidated ordinary income (loss). On June 29, 2015, the Alberta government enacted legislation to increase the provincial corporate tax rate from 10% to 12% .  As a result of this legislation, we recorded additional non-cash deferred tax expense of $135 million in the second quarter of 2015. In the second quarter of 2015, we reviewed our operations and concluded that we do not have the same level of capital needs outside the U.S. as previously expected.  Therefore, we no longer intend for previously unremitted foreign earnings of approximately $1 billion associated with our Canadian operations to be permanently reinvested outside the U.S.  As such, none of Marathon Oil’s foreign earnings remain permanently reinvested abroad.  We anticipate foreign tax credits associated with these Canadian earnings would be sufficient to offset any incremental U.S. tax liabilities, and therefore, no additional net deferred taxes have been recorded in the second quarter of 2015. 12 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 9.    Short-term Investments As of June 30, 2015, our short-term investments are comprised of bank time deposits with original maturities of greater than three months and remaining maturities of less than twelve months. The maturity dates range from September 2015 to October 2015. These short-term investments are classified as held-to-maturity investments, which are recorded at amortized cost. The carrying values of our short-term investments approximate fair value. 10.   Inventories Inventories of liquid hydrocarbons, natural gas and bitumen are carried at the lower of cost or market value.  Materials and supplies are valued at weighted average cost and reviewed for obsolescence or impairment when market conditions indicate. 11.  Property, Plant and Equipment, net of Accumulated Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization Our Libya operations continue to be impacted by civil unrest and, in December 2014, Libya’s National Oil Corporation once again declared force majeure at the Es Sider oil terminal, as disruptions from civil unrest continue.  Considerable uncertainty remains around the timing of future production and sales levels. As of June 30, 2015 , our net property, plant and equipment investment in Libya is $775 million , and total proved reserves (unaudited) in Libya as of December 31, 2014 are 243 million barrels of oil equivalent ("mmboe"). We and our partners in the Waha concessions continue to assess the situation and the condition of our assets in Libya.  Our periodic assessment of the carrying value of our net property, plant and equipment in Libya specifically considers the net investment in the assets, the duration of our concessions and the reserves anticipated to be recoverable in future periods.  The undiscounted cash flows related to our Libya assets continues to exceed the carrying value of $775 million by a material amount. Exploratory well costs capitalized greater than one year after completion of drilling were $88 million and $126 million as of June 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 .  This $38 million net decrease was associated with our Canadian in-situ assets at Birchwood.  After further evaluation of the estimated recoverable resources and our development plans, we withdrew our regulatory application for the proposed steam assisted gravity drainage ("SAGD") demonstration project. 13 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 12.  Fair Value Measurements Fair Values - Recurring The following tables present assets and liabilities accounted for at fair value on a recurring basis as of June 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 by fair value hierarchy level. Commodity derivatives include three-way collars, swaptions, extendable three-way collars and call options.  These instruments are measured at fair value using either the Black-Scholes Model or Black Model.  Inputs to both models include prices, interest rates, and implied volatility.  The inputs to these models are categorized as Level 2 because predominantly all assumptions and inputs are observable in active markets throughout the term of the instruments. Interest rate swaps are measured at fair value with a market approach using actionable broker quotes, which are Level 2 inputs. See Note 13 for additional discussion of the types of derivative instruments we use. Fair Values - Nonrecurring The following table shows the values of assets, by major category, measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis in periods subsequent to their initial recognition. Commodity prices began declining in the second half of 2014 and remain substantially lower through 2015 as compared to the first six months of 2014.  As this period of sustained reduced commodity prices continues, it could result in non-cash impairment charges related to long-lived assets in future periods. All long-lived assets held for use that were impaired in the first six months of 2015 and 2014 were held by our North America E&P segment. 14 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) In July 2015, we entered into an agreement to sell our East Texas/North Louisiana and Wilburton, Oklahoma natural gas assets. We expect the transaction to close during the third quarter of 2015.  During the second quarter of 2015, we recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $44 million related to these assets as a result of the anticipated sale.  The fair values were measured using a probability weighted income approach based on both the anticipated sales price and a held-for-use model.  The held-for-use model contained internal estimates of future production levels, prices and discount rate.  All such inputs were classified as Level 3. The Ozona development in the Gulf of Mexico ceased producing in 2013, at which time those long-lived assets were fully impaired.  In the first and second quarters of 2014, we recorded additional impairments of $17 million and $4 million as a result of estimated abandonment cost revisions.  The fair value was measured using an income approach based upon forecasted future abandonment costs, which are Level 3 inputs. Fair Values – Financial Instruments Our current assets and liabilities include financial instruments, the most significant of which are receivables, short-term investments, long-term debt due within one year, and payables.  We believe the carrying values of our receivables, short-term investments and payables approximate fair value.  Our fair value assessment incorporates a variety of considerations, including (1) the short-term duration of the instruments, (2) our investment-grade credit rating, and (3) our historical incurrence of and expected future insignificant bad debt expense, which includes an evaluation of counterparty credit risk. The following table summarizes financial instruments, excluding receivables, short-term investments, payables and derivative financial instruments, and their reported fair value by individual balance sheet line item at June 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 . (a) Excludes capital leases. Fair values of our financial assets included in other noncurrent assets, and of our financial liabilities included in other current liabilities and deferred credits and other liabilities, are measured using an income approach and most inputs are internally generated, which results in a Level 3 classification.  Estimated future cash flows are discounted using a rate deemed appropriate to obtain the fair value. Most of our long-term debt instruments are publicly-traded.  A market approach, based upon quotes from major financial institutions, which are Level 2 inputs, is used to measure the fair value of such debt.  The fair value of our debt that is not publicly-traded is measured using an income approach.  The future debt service payments are discounted using the rate at which we currently expect to borrow.  All inputs to this calculation are Level 3. 13. Derivatives For further information regarding the fair value measurement of derivative instruments, see Note 12 .  All of our interest rate and commodity derivatives are subject to enforceable master netting arrangements or similar agreements under which we may report net amounts. The following tables present the gross fair values of derivative instruments and the reported net amounts where they appear on the consolidated balance sheets as of June 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 . 15 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) Derivatives Designated as Fair Value Hedges The following table presents, by maturity date, information about our interest rate swap agreements as of June 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , including the weighted average, London Interbank Offer Rate (“LIBOR”)-based, floating rate. The pretax effects of derivative instruments designated as hedges of fair value in our consolidated statements of income are summarized in the table below.  The foreign currency forwards were used to hedge the current Norwegian tax liability of our Norway business that was sold in the fourth quarter of 2014.  Those instruments outstanding were transferred to the purchaser of the Norway business upon closing of the sale.  There is no ineffectiveness related to the fair value hedges. Derivatives not Designated as Hedges During the first six months of 2015, we entered into multiple crude oil derivatives indexed to New York Mercantile Exchange ("NYMEX") West Texas Intermediate ("WTI"), related to a portion of our forecasted North America E&P sales through December 2016.  These commodity derivatives primarily consist of call options and three way-collars which consist of a sold call (ceiling), a purchased put (floor) and a sold put.  The ceiling price is the maximum we will receive for the contract crude oil volumes, the floor is the minimum price we will receive, unless the market price falls below the sold put strike price. 16 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) In this case, we receive the NYMEX WTI price plus the difference between the floor and the sold put price.  These commodity derivatives were not designated as hedges and are shown in the table below: The impact of these crude oil derivative instruments appears in sales and other operating revenues in our consolidated statements of income and was a net loss of $43 million and $17 million in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 .  There were no crude oil derivative instruments in the first six months of 2014. On June 1, 2015, we entered into Treasury rate locks, which expired on the same day, to hedge against timing differences as it related to our Notes offering (see Note 15 ).  Following the execution of the Treasury locks, corresponding interest rates increased during the day of June 1.  As a result, the settlement of the Treasury rate locks resulted in a gain of $6 million , which was recognized in net interest and other in our consolidated statements of income. 14.    Incentive Based Compensation Stock option and restricted stock awards The following table presents a summary of stock option and restricted stock award activity for the first six months of 2015 : (a) The weighted average grant date fair value of stock option awards granted was $6.84 per share. Stock-based performance unit awards During the first six months of 2015, we granted 382,335 stock-based performance units to certain officers.  The grant date fair value per unit was $31.77 . 17 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 15.  Debt Revolving Credit Facility As of June 30, 2015 , we had no borrowings against our revolving credit facility (as amended, the "Credit Facility"), as described below. In May 2015, we amended our $2.5 billion unsecured Credit Facility to increase the facility size by $500 million to a total of $3 billion and extend the maturity date by an additional year such that the Credit Facility now matures in May 2020.  The amendment additionally provides us the ability to request two one-year extensions to the maturity date and an option to increase the commitment amount by up to an additional $500 million , subject to the consent of any increasing lenders.  The sub-facilities for swing-line loans and letters of credit remain unchanged allowing up to an aggregate amount of $100 million and $500 million , respectively.  Fees on the unused commitment of each lender, as well as the borrowing options under the Credit Facility, remain unchanged. The Credit Facility includes a covenant requiring that our ratio of total debt to total capitalization not exceed 65% as of the last day of each fiscal quarter. If an event of default occurs, the lenders holding more than half of the commitments may terminate the commitments under the Credit Facility and require the immediate repayment of all outstanding borrowings and the cash collateralization of all outstanding letters of credit under the Credit Facility.  As of June 30, 2015, we were in compliance with this covenant with a debt-to-capitalization ratio of 29% . Debt Issuance On June 10, 2015, we issued $2 billion aggregate principal amount of unsecured senior notes which consist of the following series: • $600 million of 2.70% senior notes due June 1, 2020 • $900 million of 3.85% senior notes due June 1, 2025 • $500 million of 5.20% senior notes due June 1, 2045 Interest on each series of senior notes is payable semi-annually beginning December 1, 2015. We will use the aggregate net proceeds to repay our $1 billion 0.90% senior notes due 2015, which mature on November 1, 2015, and for general corporate purposes. We may redeem some or all of the senior notes at any time at the applicable redemption price, plus accrued interest, if any. As of June 30, 2015, we were in compliance with the covenants under the indenture governing the senior notes. 16.  Reclassifications Out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) The following table presents a summary of amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) to income (loss) from continuing operations in their entirety: 18 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Unaudited) 17.  Supplemental Cash Flow Information 18.   Commitments and Contingencies We are a defendant in a number of lawsuits arising in the ordinary course of business, including, but not limited to, royalty claims, contract claims and environmental claims. While the ultimate outcome and impact to us cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe the resolution of these proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. 19 Item 2. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations We are a global energy company with operations in North America, Europe and Africa.  Each of our three reportable operating segments is organized and managed based upon both geographic location and the nature of the products and services it offers. As a result of the sale of our Angola assets and our Norway business in 2014, both are reflected as discontinued operations.  The disclosures in this report related to results of operations and cash flows are presented on the basis of continuing operations, unless otherwise noted. Executive Overview Commodity prices are the most significant factor impacting our revenues, profitability, operating cash flows and their subsequent reinvestment into our business.  Commodity prices began declining in the second half of 2014 and remain substantially lower through 2015 as compared to the first six months of 2014.   We believe we can manage in this lower commodity price cycle through a continued focus on development in our three U.S. resource plays, operational execution, efficiency improvements, cost reductions, capital discipline and portfolio optimization, all while maintaining financial flexibility. Our significant financial results, operating activities and strategic actions include the following: Financial results 20 We continue to optimize our resource allocation given the current price environment. We expect our full-year 2015 capital, investment and exploration budget to be at or below $3.3 billion.  We estimate our full-year North America E&P and International E&P production volumes (excluding Libya) to be 375 - 390 net mboed. Operations North America E&P--Production North America E&P segment average net sales volumes in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 increase d 21% and 26% compared to the second quarter and first six months of 2014 .  Net liquid hydrocarbon sales volumes increase d 35 thousand barrels per day ("mbbld") and 47 mbbld, and net natural gas sales volumes increase d 67 million cubic feet per day ("mmcfd") and 63 mmcfd in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 compared to the second quarter and first six months of 2014 , reflecting continued growth from the combined U.S. resource plays. (a) Includes Gulf of Mexico and other conventional onshore U.S. production. 22 The following table presents a summary of our operated drilling activity in the U.S. resource plays: Eagle Ford – Average net sales volumes from Eagle Ford were 135 mboed and 141 mboed in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 compared to 102 mboed and 99 mboed in the same periods of 2014 , for increase s of 32% and 42% .  Approximately 61% of second quarter sales was crude oil and condensate, 19 % was NGLs and 20 % was natural gas.  Our average time to drill an Eagle Ford well in second quarter 2015 , spud-to-total depth, was 11 days.  Also, during the second quarter of 2015, we brought online 8 Upper Eagle Ford, 33 Lower Eagle Ford and 11 Austin Chalk gross operated wells and we completed and brought online three "stack-and-frac" pilots with wells in three horizons. Bakken – Average net sales volumes from the Bakken shale were 61 mboed and 59 mboed in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 compared to 50 mboed and 46 mboed in the same period for 2014 , for increase s of 22% and 28% .  Our Bakken production averaged approximately 89 % crude oil, 5 % NGLs and 6 % natural gas.  Our time to drill a Bakken well, spud-to-total depth, averaged 13 days in the second quarter of 2015 . Application of the enhanced completion design continues to provide promising results, with outperformance of historical type curves after 180 days of cumulative production.  The enhanced completion design optimizes proppant loading, frac fluid volumes and stage density.  Three high-density pilots (six wells per horizon) were completed through the second quarter.  Also in the second quarter, our first Three Forks second bench well in the Myrmidon was completed. Oklahoma Resource Basins – Net sales volumes from the Oklahoma Resource Basins averaged 24 mboed in both the second quarter and first six months of 2015 compared to 18 mboed and 17 mboed in the comparable 2014 periods, for increase s of 33% and 41% .  Our second quarter 2015 production was approximately 20% crude, 25% NGLs and 55% natural gas.  Of the three gross operated wells brought to sales this quarter, two were SCOOP wells and one was a STACK Osage well.  We also finished drilling five operated Smith infill pilot wells this quarter. Additionally, we continue to leverage the benefit of participation in outside-operated wells and plan to participate in approximately 85 outside-operated wells in 2015 in the SCOOP Woodford, SCOOP Springer and STACK areas.  In the first six months of 2015 , we participated in four outside-operated high-density spacing pilots in the SCOOP area; three in the Woodford (80-128 acre spacing) and one in the emerging Springer shale (105-128 acre spacing) overlaying the Woodford. Two outside-operated STACK Meramec XL wells were brought to sales during the quarter. Gulf of Mexico – Development work continues in the Gunflint field located on Mississippi Canyon Blocks 948, 949, 992 (N/2) and 993 (N/2).  We expect the two-well subsea tieback to be complete in the second half of 2015.  We hold an 18% non-operated working interest in the Gunflint field. North America E&P--Exploration Gulf of Mexico – During the second quarter, we spud the Solomon exploration prospect on Walker Ridge Block 225 and farmed down our operated working interest to 58%. The third appraisal well on the Shenandoah prospect was spud in May 2015 and is still drilling.  The well is located in Walker Ridge Block 52, in which we hold a 10% non-operated working interest. 23 International E&P--Production International E&P segment average net sales volumes in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 decrease d 12% and 10% compared to the second quarter and first six months of 2014 , reflecting field decline and a planned turnaround in Equatorial Guinea in the second quarter of 2015 , which also reduced sales to the AMPCO and LNG facilities.  In addition, the AMPCO methanol facility completed a planned turnaround in first quarter 2015 . Equatorial Guinea – Average net sales volumes were 89 mboed and 93 mboed in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 compared to 105 mboed and 107 mboed in the same periods of 2014 .  Planned turnaround and maintenance activities at the Alba field and EG LNG facilities reduced production rates during the second quarter of 2015.  The Alba turnaround subsequently reduced sales to our equity method investees, Alba Plant LLC, EGHoldings and AMPCO.  Additionally, there was a planned turnaround at AMPCO in the first quarter of 2015. During the second quarter of 2015, the Alba C21 development well reached total depth and completion activities are underway.  To date, well performance results are consistent with pre-drill estimates. United Kingdom – Average net sales volumes were 19 mboed for each of the second quarter and first six months of 2015 , relatively flat as compared to 18 mboed in the same periods of 2014 .  Net sales volumes benefited from improved production as two subsea development wells at West Brae began producing during the first and second quarters of 2015.  This completed the last of the planned five-well Brae infill drilling program begun in 2014.  In addition, as full compression was reinstated during the second quarter of 2015 at the non-operated Foinaven field, this contributed to improved reliability. During the third quarter of 2015, planned maintenance activities are scheduled at the East Brae and non-operated Foinaven field. Libya – We had no sales during the first six months of 2015 as a result of continued civil unrest.  In December 2014, Libya’s National Oil Corporation reinstated force majeure at the Es Sider oil terminal, as disruptions from civil unrest continue.  Considerable uncertainty remains around the timing of future production and sales levels. 24 International E&P--Exploration Kurdistan Region of Iraq – On the Harir Block, testing was completed on the Mirawa-2 appraisal well during the second quarter of 2015.  The well has been temporarily suspended as a potential future producer and the drilling rig has been de-mobilized. We hold a 45% operated working interest in the block. Oil Sands Mining Our net synthetic crude oil sales volumes were 29 mbbld and 44 mbbld in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 compared to 44 mbbld and 45 mbbld in the same periods of 2014 .  Production declined in the second quarter of 2015 primarily due to the planned turnarounds at the base upgrader and Muskeg River Mine and unplanned downtime at the expansion upgrader.  Production was relatively flat in the first six months of 2015 compared to the same period in 2014 as the planned turnarounds and unplanned downtime during the second quarter of 2015 were mostly offset by higher production driven by improved mine reliability during the first quarter of 2015.  We hold a 20% non-operated working interest in the AOSP. 25 Market Conditions Prevailing prices for the crude oil, NGLs and natural gas that we produce significantly impact our revenues and cash flows.   The benchmark prices for crude oil, NGLs and natural gas were significantly lower in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 as compared to the same periods in 2014; as a result, we experienced significant declines in our price realizations associated with those benchmarks.  Additional detail on market conditions, including our average price realizations and benchmarks for crude oil, NGLs and natural gas relative to our operating segments, follows. North America E&P The following table presents our average price realizations and the related benchmarks for crude oil, NGLs and natural gas for the second quarter and first six months of 2015 and 2014 . Crude oil and condensate – Our crude oil and condensate price realizations may differ from the benchmark due to the quality and location of the product. Natural gas liquids – The majority of our NGL volumes are sold at reference to Mont Belvieu prices. 26 Natural gas – A significant portion of our natural gas production in the U.S. is sold at bid-week prices, or first-of-month indices relative to our specific producing areas. International E&P The following table presents our average price realizations and the related benchmark for crude oil for the second quarter and first six months of 2015 and 2014 . Liquid hydrocarbons – Our United Kingdom ("U.K.") liquid hydrocarbon production is generally sold in relation to the Brent crude benchmark.  Our production from Equatorial Guinea is condensate, which receives lower prices than crude oil. NGLs in E.G. are subject to fixed-price, term contracts; therefore, our reported average NGL realized prices within the International E&P segment will not fully track market price movements. Natural gas – Our natural gas sales from E.G. are subject to fixed-price, term contracts, making realized prices in this area less volatile; therefore, our reported average natural gas realized prices within the International E&P segment will not fully track market price movements. Oil Sands Mining The Oil Sands Mining segment produces and sells various qualities of synthetic crude oil.  Output mix can be impacted by operational reliability or planned unit outages at the mines or upgrader.  Sales prices for roughly two-thirds of the normal output mix have historically tracked movements in WTI and one-third have historically tracked movements in the Canadian heavy crude oil marker, primarily Western Canadian Select ("WCS"). The operating cost structure of our Oil Sands Mining operations is predominantly fixed and therefore many of the costs incurred in times of full operation continue during production downtime.  Per-unit costs are sensitive to production rates.  Key variable costs are natural gas and diesel fuel, which track commodity markets such as the Canadian Alberta Energy Company ("AECO") natural gas sales index and crude oil prices. 27 The following table presents our average price realizations and the related benchmarks that impacted both our revenues and variable costs for the second quarter and first six months of 2015 and 2014 . Results of Operations Consolidated Results of Operation Sales and other operating revenues, including related party are presented by segment in the table below: Below is a price/volume analysis for each segment.  Refer to the preceding Operations and Market Conditions sections for additional detail related to our net sales volumes and average price realizations. North America E&P 28 International E&P Oil Sands Mining Marketing revenues decreased $435 million and $772 million in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 from the comparable prior-year periods.  Marketing activities include the purchase of commodities from third parties for resale and serve to aggregate volumes in order to satisfy transportation commitments as well as to achieve flexibility within product types and delivery points.  Because the volume of marketing activity is based on market dynamics, it can fluctuate from period to period.  The decreases are related primarily to lower marketed volumes in North America, which were further compounded by a lower commodity price environment. Income from equity method investments decreased $ 94 million and $195 million in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 from the comparable 2014 period.  The decrease in the second quarter of 2015 is primarily due to lower price realizations for Liquified Natural Gas ("LNG") at our LNG facility, Liquified Petroleum Gas ("LPG") at our Alba plant, and lower methanol prices at our AMPCO methanol facility, all of which are located in E.G.  Also contributing to the decrease in 2015 were lower sales volumes due to the previously mentioned planned turnaround and maintenance activities at the AMPCO methanol plant, the Alba field and the LNG facility. Production expenses decreased $112 million in the second quarter of 2015 compared to the second quarter of 2014.  North America E&P declined $38 million due to lower operational, maintenance and labor costs.  International E&P declined $35 million primarily because of lower costs related to lower sales volumes, while the second quarter of 2014 included $5 million of turnaround costs at Brae and subsea maintenance costs at the non-operated Foinaven field in the U.K.  OSM decreased $39 million primarily due to lower feedstock purchases (due to planned turnarounds and unplanned downtime as previously discussed) and continued cost management, especially staffing and contract labor.  Also contributing to the OSM decrease was a more favorable exchange rate on expenses denominated in the Canadian Dollar.  These declines were partially offset by costs incurred from the turnaround. Production expenses for the first six months of 2015 decreased by $210 million compared to the same period of 2014.  North America E&P declined $47 million due to lower operational, maintenance and labor costs.  International E&P declined 29 $68 million due to lower repair, maintenance and turnaround costs as well as lower production volumes.  The previous six month period included $11 million of non-recurring riser repair costs in E.G., $5 million of expenses from a Brae turnaround and costs related to reliability issues and subsea maintenance at the non-operated Foinaven field in the U.K.  OSM decreased $95 million due to the same reasons as described in the preceding paragraph. The second quarter of 2015 production expense rate (expense per boe) for North America E&P declined relative to the same quarter in 2014 due to overall cost reductions, as previously discussed, and leveraging efficiencies as production volumes increased.  The expense rate for International E&P declined due to reduced maintenance and project costs in second quarter of 2015 as compared to 2014.  The OSM expense rate increased due to the turnarounds and unplanned downtime in the second quarter of 2015, which resulted in lower sales volumes and higher costs. The expense rate during the first six months of 2015 compared the same period in 2014 decreased for North America E&P due to overall cost reductions as discussed in the preceding paragraph.  The International E&P expense rate decreased in the first six months of 2015 due to lower project costs as discussed in the preceding paragraphs.  The OSM expense rate remained relatively flat in the six months of 2015 as the lower feedstock purchases, cost management and a favorable exchange rate were offset by the aforementioned higher turnaround costs.  The following table provides production expense rates for each segment: Marketing costs decreased $432 million and $769 million in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 from the comparable 2014 periods, consistent with the marketing revenues changes discussed above. Exploration expenses declined $34 million in the second quarter of 2015 compared to the second quarter of 2014 due to lower unproved property impairments and dry well costs.  Unproved property impairments declined primarily as a result of fewer Eagle Ford and Bakken leases that either expired or that we decided not to drill or extend. The second quarter of 2014 included dry well costs associated with our exploration programs in Kurdistan, Ethiopia and Kenya.  Included in the dry well costs for the second quarter of 2015 is $38 million of previously suspended well costs that were written off.  The well costs are associated with our Canadian in-situ assets at Birchwood.  See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion. Exploration expenses were $17 million lower in the first six months of 2015 than in the comparable 2014 period due to lower unproved property impairments, which were partially offset by higher dry well costs.  Unproved property impairments were higher in 2014 primarily as a result of Eagle Ford and Bakken leases that either expired or that we decided not to drill or extend.  Dry well costs increased for the first six months of 2015 due to costs associated with the Sodalita West #1 well in E.G., the Key Largo well in the Gulf of Mexico, and the aforementioned suspended well costs related to Birchwood in-situ.  Dry well costs for the first six months of 2014 primarily consist of our exploration programs in Kurdistan, Ethiopia and Kenya.  The following table summarizes the components of exploration expenses: 30 Depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”) increased $71 million and $249 million in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 from the comparable 2014 periods primarily as a result of higher North America E&P net sales volumes from our three U.S. resource plays, partially offset by lower International E&P sales volumes.  OSM net sales volumes also declined in the second quarter of 2015, as previously discussed, also contributing to that quarter's decrease.  Our segments apply the units-of-production method to the majority of their assets, including capitalized asset retirement costs; therefore, volumes have an impact on DD&A expense. The DD&A rate (expense per boe), which is impacted by field-level changes in sales volumes, reserves and capitalized costs, can also cause changes to our DD&A. The following table provides DD&A rates for each segment. Impairments are discussed in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements. Taxes other than income include production, severance and ad valorem taxes, primarily in the U.S., which tend to increase or decrease in relation to revenue and sales volumes.  With the decrease in North America E&P revenues due to lower price realizations, taxes other than income decreased $ 31 million and $59 million in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 from the comparable 2014 periods. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in sales volumes in North America E&P.  The following table summarizes the components of taxes other than income: General and administrative expenses increased $29 million in the second quarter of 2015 compared to the same period in 2014 primarily due to higher pension settlement charges.  Settlement charges in the second quarter of 2015 totaled $64 million, compared to settlement charges of $8 million in the prior year quarter.  This increase in pension settlement costs was partially offset by costs savings realized from the workforce reductions that occurred in the first quarter of 2015 . General and administrative expenses increased $13 million in the first six months of 2015 compared to the same period in 2014.  This increase was primarily due to $43 million of severance related expenses in the first quarter of 2015 and $10 million of increased pension settlement expense ( first six months of 2015 totaled $81 million as compared to $71 million for the previous year).  These increased costs were partially offset by costs savings realized in the second quarter of 2015 resulting from the workforce reductions. Provision (benefit) for income taxes reflect effective tax rates of 2% and 18% in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 , as compared to 30% and 32% from the comparable 2014 periods.  The effective rates for 2015 reflect $135 million of non-cash additional deferred tax expense recorded in the second quarter of 2015 as a result of enacted corporate tax changes in Alberta, Canada.  See Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of the effective tax rate. Discontinued operations presented in 2014 are net of tax.  See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for financial information about discontinued operations. 31 Segment Income (Loss) Segment income (loss) represents income (loss) from continuing operations excluding certain items not allocated to segments, net of income taxes, attributable to the operating segments.  Our corporate and operations support general and administrative costs are not allocated to the operating segments.  Gains or losses on dispositions, certain impairments, change in tax expense associated with a tax rate change, unrealized gains or losses on crude oil derivative instruments, or other items that affect comparability also are not allocated to operating segments. The following table reconciles segment income (loss) to net income (loss): North America E&P segment income (loss) decreased $347 million and $750 million after-tax in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 from the comparable 2014 periods.  The decrease is primarily due to lower price realizations, which was partially offset by the impacts from the increased net sales volumes from the U.S. resource plays. International E&P segment income decreased $119 million and $317 million after-tax in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 from the comparable 2014 periods.  The decreases are primarily due to lower liquid hydrocarbon price realizations and net sales volumes, as well as reduced income from equity investments.  These declines were partially offset by lower production and exploration expenses. Oil Sands Mining segment income (loss) decreased $132 million and $215 million after-tax in the second quarter and first six months of 2015 from the comparable 2014 periods primarily due to lower price realizations, partially offset by reduced production expenses. Critical Accounting Estimates There have been no changes to our critical accounting estimates subsequent to December 31, 2014 . Accounting Standards Not Yet Adopted See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements. 32 Cash Flows and Liquidity Cash Flows The following table presents sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents: Commodity prices began declining in the second half of 2014 and remain substantially lower through 2015 as compared to the first six months of 2014.  This lower price trend adversely impacted our cash flows in 2015.  Partially offsetting the decline in prices were increased net sales volumes in the North America E&P segment.  While we are unable to predict future commodity price movements, if this lower price environment continues, it would continue to negatively impact our cash flows from operating activities as compared to the previous year. Borrowings reflect net proceeds received from the issuance of senior notes in June 2015.  See Liquidity and Capital Resources below for additional information. Cash flows from discontinued operations are primarily related to our Norway business, which we disposed of in the fourth quarter of 2014.  Disposals of assets in the first six months of 2014 primarily reflect the net proceeds from the sales of our Angola assets.  Disposition transactions are discussed in further detail in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. Purchases of short-term investments were made from proceeds received from the senior notes issuance in June 2015.  The investments consist of time deposits with maturity dates ranging from September - October 2015. 33 Additions to property, plant and equipment are our most significant use of cash and cash equivalents.  The following table shows capital expenditures by segment and reconciles to additions to property, plant and equipment in continuing operations as presented in the consolidated statements of cash flows: During the first six months of 2014 , we acquired 29 million common shares at a cost of $1 billion under our share repurchase program, 13 million of which were acquired in the second quarter of 2014 at a cost of $449 million. Liquidity and Capital Resources On June 10, 2015, we issued $2 billion aggregate principal amount of unsecured senior notes which consist of the following series: • $600 million of 2.70% senior notes due June 1, 2020 • $900 million of 3.85% senior notes due June 1, 2025 • $500 million of 5.20% senior notes due June 1, 2045 Interest on each series of senior notes is payable semi-annually beginning December 1, 2015. We will use the aggregate net proceeds to repay our $1 billion 0.90% senior notes due 2015, which mature on November 1, 2015, and for general corporate purposes. In May 2015, we amended our $2.5 billion unsecured revolving credit facility (as so amended, the "Credit Facility") to increase the facility size by $500 million to a total of $3 billion and extend the maturity date by an additional year such that the Credit Facility now matures in May 2020.  The amendment additionally provides us the ability to request two one-year extensions to the maturity date and an option to increase the commitment amount by up to an additional $500 million, subject to the consent of any increasing lenders.  The sub-facilities for swing-line loans and letters of credit remain unchanged allowing up to an aggregate amount of $100 million and $500 million, respectively.  Fees on the unused commitment of each lender, as well as the borrowing options under the Credit Facility, remain unchanged. Our main sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, internally generated cash flow from operations, the issuance of notes, our $3 billion Credit Facility and sales of non-core assets.  Our working capital requirements are supported by these sources and we may also issue commercial paper, which is backed by our revolving credit facility.  Furthermore, we actively manage our capital spending program, including the level and timing of activities associated with our drilling programs.  Because of the alternatives available to us as discussed above, and access to capital markets through the shelf registration discussed below, we believe that our liquidity is adequate to fund not only our current operations, but also our funding requirements for the foreseeable future, including our capital spending programs, dividend payments, defined benefit plan contributions, repayment of debt maturities, and other amounts that may ultimately be paid in connection with contingencies. Outlook We expect our capital, investment and exploration spending budget for full-year 2015 to be at or below $3.3 billion and estimate full-year North America E&P and International E&P production volumes (excluding Libya) to be 375-390 net mboed. 34 Capital Resources Credit Arrangements and Borrowings At June 30, 2015 , we had no borrowings against our revolving credit facility and no amounts outstanding under our U.S. commercial paper program that is backed by the revolving credit facility. At June 30, 2015 , we had $8.4 billion in long-term debt outstanding, of which approximately $1.0 billion matures in the fourth quarter of 2015.  We do not have any triggers on any of our corporate debt that would cause an event of default in the case of a downgrade of our credit ratings. Shelf Registration We have a universal shelf registration statement filed with the SEC under which we, as a "well-known seasoned issuer" for purposes of SEC rules, have the ability to issue and sell an indeterminate amount of various types of equity and debt securities. Cash and Short-Term Investments-Adjusted Debt-To-Capital Ratio Our cash and short-term investments-adjusted debt-to-capital ratio (total debt-minus-cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments to total debt-plus-equity-minus-cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments) was 22% at June 30, 2015 , compared to 16% at December 31, 2014 . Capital Requirements As noted above in "Outlook," we expect our total capital, investment and exploration spending budget for full-year 2015 to be at or below $3.3 billion. On July 29, 2015, our Board of Directors approved a dividend of $0.21 per share for the second quarter of 2015 payable September 10, 2015 to stockholders of record at the close of business on August 19, 2015. As of June 30, 2015 , we plan to make contributions of up to $42 million to our funded pension plans during the remainder of 2015. Contractual Cash Obligations As of June 30, 2105, there are no material changes to our consolidated cash obligations to make future payments under existing contracts, as disclosed in our 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K, except for our issuance of $2 billion aggregate principal amount of unsecured senior notes, as more fully described in Note 15 . 35 Environmental Matters We have incurred and will continue to incur capital, operating and maintenance, and remediation expenditures as a result of environmental laws and regulations.  If these expenditures, as with all costs, are not ultimately reflected in the prices of our products and services, our operating results will be adversely affected.  We believe that substantially all of our competitors must comply with similar environmental laws and regulations.  However, the specific impact on each competitor may vary depending on a number of factors, including the age and location of its operating facilities, marketing areas and production processes. There have been no significant changes to our environmental matters subsequent to December 31, 2014 . Other Contingencies We are a defendant in a number of lawsuits arising in the ordinary course of business, including, but not limited to, royalty claims, contract claims and environmental claims.  While the ultimate outcome and impact to us cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe the resolution of these proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Forward-Looking Statements This report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the "Exchange Act"). All statements other than statements of historical fact included or incorporated by reference in this report are forward-looking statements, including without limitation statements regarding our operational, financial and growth strategies, our ability to effect those strategies and the expected timing and results thereof, planned capital expenditures and the impact thereof, future drilling plans, timing and expectations, maintenance activities and the timing and impact thereof, well spud timing and expectations, our financial and operational outlook and ability to fulfill that outlook, our financial position, liquidity and capital resources, our 2015 budget and planned allocation, and the plans and objectives of our management for our future operations. In addition, many forward-looking statements may be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “target,” “plan,” “project,” “could,” “may,” “should,” “would” or similar words indicating that future outcomes are uncertain. While we believe that our assumptions concerning future events are reasonable, a number of factors could cause results to differ materially from those indicated by such forward-looking statements including, but not limited to: All forward-looking statements included in this report are based on information available to us on the date of this report. Except as required by law, we assume no duty to revise or update any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. 36 Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk For a detailed discussion of our risk management strategies and our derivative instruments, see Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk in our 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K.  Additional disclosures regarding our open derivative positions, including underlying notional quantities, how they are reported in our consolidated financial statements and how their fair values are measured, may be found in Notes 12 and 13 to the consolidated financial statements. Commodity Price Risk During the first six months of 2015, we entered into crude oil derivatives, indexed to NYMEX WTI, related to a portion of our forecasted North America E&P sales.  The table below provides a summary of open positions as of June 30, 2015 : The following table provides a sensitivity analysis of the projected incremental effect on income (loss) from operations of a hypothetical 10% change in NYMEX WTI prices on our open commodity derivative instruments as of June 30, 2015 . Interest Rate Risk Sensitivity analysis of the incremental effect of a hypothetical 10 percent change in interest rates on financial assets and liabilities as of June 30, 2015 , is provided in the following table. 37 Item 4. Controls and Procedures An evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act) was carried out under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer.  As of the end of the period covered by this Report based upon that evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that the design and operation of these disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of June 30, 2015 . During the second quarter of 2015 , there were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act) that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 38 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Supplemental Statistics (Unaudited) 39 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Supplemental Statistics (Unaudited) 40 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Supplemental Statistics (Unaudited) 41 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Supplemental Statistics (Unaudited) 42 MARATHON OIL CORPORATION Supplemental Statistics (Unaudited) 43 Part II – OTHER INFORMATION Item 1. Legal Proceedings We are a defendant in a number of lawsuits arising in the ordinary course of business, including, but not limited to, royalty claims, contract claims and environmental claims.  While the ultimate outcome and impact to us cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe the resolution of these proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Item 1A. Risk Factors We are subject to various risks and uncertainties in the course of our business.  There have been no material changes to the risk factors under Item 1A. Risk Factors in our 2014 Annual Report on Form 10-K. Item 2. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds The following table provides information about purchases by Marathon Oil during the quarter ended June 30, 2015, of equity securities that are registered by Marathon Oil pursuant to Section 12 of the Exchange Act of 1934. Item 6.  Exhibits The information required by this Item 6 is set forth in the Exhibit Index accompanying this quarterly report on Form 10-Q. 44 SIGNATURES Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized. 45 Exhibit Index