10-Q 1 vloform10-qx6302018.htm 10-Q Document UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q (Mark One) For the quarterly period ended June 30, 2018 OR Commission File Number 1-13175 VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) One Valero Way San Antonio, Texas (Address of principal executive offices) 78249 (Zip Code) (210) 345-2000 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes o No þ The number of shares of the registrant’s only class of common stock, $0.01 par value, outstanding as of July 31, 2018 was 427,398,027 . VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION TABLE OF CONTENTS i Table of Contents PART I – FINANCIAL INFORMATION ITEM 1. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS (millions of dollars, except par value) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 1 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) (unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 2 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (millions of dollars) (unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 3 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (millions of dollars) (unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 4 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Basis of Presentation General As used in this report, the terms “Valero,” “we,” “us,” or “our” refer to Valero Energy Corporation, one or more of its consolidated subsidiaries, or all of them taken as a whole. These unaudited financial statements have been prepared in accordance with United States (U.S.) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for interim financial information and with the instructions to Form 10-Q and Article 10 of Regulation S-X of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and notes required by U.S. GAAP for complete financial statements. In the opinion of management, all adjustments considered necessary for a fair presentation have been included. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature unless disclosed otherwise. Operating results for the six months ended June 30, 2018 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the year ending December 31, 2018. The balance sheet as of December 31, 2017 has been derived from our audited financial statements as of that date. For further information, refer to our financial statements and notes thereto included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017 . Reclassifications Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform to the 2018 presentation. Significant Accounting Policies Use of Estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we review our estimates based on currently available information. Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates. Revenue Recognition Background We adopted the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” (Topic 606) on January 1, 2018, as described below in “Accounting Pronouncements Adopted on January 1, 2018.” Accordingly, our revenue recognition accounting policy has been revised to reflect the adoption of this standard. Revised Policy Our revenues are primarily generated from contracts with customers. We generate revenue from contracts with customers from the sale of products by our refining and ethanol segments. Our VLP segment generates intersegment revenues from transportation and terminaling activities provided to our refining segment that are eliminated in consolidation. Revenues are recognized when we satisfy our performance obligation to transfer products to our customers, which typically occurs at a point in time upon shipment or delivery of the products, and for an amount that reflects the transaction price that is allocated to the performance obligation. 5 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the benefits from, the products at the point of shipment or delivery. As a result, we consider control to have transferred upon shipment or delivery because we have a present right to payment at that time, the customer has legal title to the asset, we have transferred physical possession of the asset, and the customer has significant risks and rewards of ownership of the asset. Our contracts with customers state the final terms of the sale, including the description, quantity, and price for goods sold. Payment is typically due in full within two to ten days of delivery. In the normal course of business, we generally do not accept product returns. The transaction price is the consideration that we expect to be entitled to in exchange for our products. The transaction price for substantially all of our contracts is generally based on commodity market pricing (i.e., variable consideration). As such, this market pricing may be constrained (i.e., not estimable) at the inception of the contract but will be recognized based on the applicable market pricing, which will be known upon transfer of the goods to the customer. Some of our contracts also contain variable consideration in the form of sales incentives to our customers, such as discounts and rebates. For contracts that include variable consideration, we estimate the factors that determine the variable consideration in order to establish the transaction price. We have elected to exclude from the measurement of the transaction price all taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction and collected by us from a customer (e.g., sales tax, use tax, value-added tax, etc.). We continue to include in the transaction price excise taxes that are imposed on certain inventories in our international operations. The amount of such taxes is provided in supplemental information in a footnote on the statements of income. There are instances where we provide shipping services in relation to the goods sold to our customer. Shipping and handling costs that occur before the customer obtains control of the goods are deemed to be fulfillment activities and are included in cost of materials and other. We have elected to account for shipping and handling activities that occur after the customer has obtained control of a good as fulfillment activities rather than as a promised service and we have included these activities in cost of materials and other. Accounting Pronouncements Adopted on January 1, 2018 Topic 606 As previously noted, we adopted the provisions of Topic 606 on January 1, 2018. Topic 606 clarifies the principles for recognizing revenue and supersedes previous revenue recognition requirements under “Revenue Recognition (Topic 605),” using the modified retrospective method of adoption as permitted by the standard. Under this method, the cumulative effect of initially applying the standard is recognized as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings, and revenues reported in the periods prior to the date of adoption are not changed. We elected to apply the transition guidance for Topic 606 only to contracts that were not completed as of the date of adoption. There was no material impact to our financial position as a result of adopting Topic 606; therefore, there was no cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of January 1, 2018. Additionally, there was no material impact to our financial position or results of operations as of and for the three and six months ended June 30, 2018 . See “Revenue Recognition” above for a discussion of our accounting policy affected by our adoption of Topic 606. Also see Note 11 for further information on 6 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) our revenues. We implemented new processes in order to monitor ongoing compliance with accounting and disclosure requirements. ASU No. 2016-01 In January 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-01, “Financial Instruments—Overall (Subtopic 825-10),” (ASU No. 2016-01) to enhance the reporting model for financial instruments regarding certain aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation, and disclosure. Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted the provisions of ASU No. 2016-01 using the cumulative-effect method of adoption as required by the ASU. The adoption of this ASU did not affect our financial position or our results of operations as of or for the three and six months ended June 30, 2018 , but it resulted in reduced disclosures as it eliminated the requirement to disclose the methods and significant assumptions used to estimate the fair value of financial instruments. ASU No. 2017-07 In March 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-07, “Compensation—Retirement Benefits (Topic 715),” (ASU No. 2017-07) which requires employers to report the service cost component of net periodic pension cost and net periodic postretirement benefit cost in the same line item as other compensation costs arising from services rendered by the pertinent employees during the period. It also requires the other components of net periodic pension cost and net periodic postretirement benefit cost (non-service cost components) to be presented in the income statement separately from the service cost component and outside a subtotal of income from operations. Effective January 1, 2018, we retrospectively adopted the provisions of ASU No. 2017-07. The adoption of this ASU did not affect our financial position or results of operations, but did result in the reclassification of non-service cost components from operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) and general and administrative expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) to other income (expense), net. This resulted in an increase of $14 million and $21 million in operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) and a decrease of $3 million and $1 million in general and administrative expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) for the three and six months ended June 30, 2017 , respectively. ASU No. 2017-09 In May 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-09, “Compensation—Stock Compensation (Topic 718),” (ASU No. 2017-09) to reduce diversity in practice, as well as reduce cost and complexity regarding a change to the terms or conditions of a share-based payment award. Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted ASU No. 2017-09. The adoption of this ASU did not have an immediate effect on our financial position or results of operations as it is applied prospectively to an award modified on or after adoption. ASU No. 2018-02 In February 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-02, “Income Statement—Reporting Comprehensive Income (Topic 220),” (ASU No. 2018-02) which allows for the stranded tax effects resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (Tax Reform) to be reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income to retained earnings. The provisions of ASU No. 2018-02 are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. This ASU shall be applied either at the beginning of the annual or interim period of adoption or retrospectively to each period in which the income tax effects of Tax Reform affects the items remaining in accumulated other comprehensive income. We elected to reclassify the stranded income tax effects of Tax Reform from accumulated other comprehensive loss to retained earnings as of the beginning of the interim 7 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) period of adoption. Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted ASU No. 2018-02 and such adoption did not affect our financial position or results of operations but resulted in the reclassification of $91 million of income tax benefits related to Tax Reform from accumulated other comprehensive loss to retained earnings as presented in Note 6 under “Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss.” We release stranded income tax effects from accumulated other comprehensive loss to retained earnings on an individual item basis as those items are reclassified into income. ASU No. 2018-05 In March 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-05, “Income Taxes (Topic 740)—Amendments to SEC Paragraphs Pursuant to SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118,” (ASU No. 2018-05) which amends certain Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) material in Topic 740 for the income tax accounting implications of the recently issued Tax Reform. This guidance clarifies the application of Topic 740 in situations where a registrant does not have the necessary information available, prepared, or analyzed in reasonable detail to complete the accounting under Topic 740 for certain income tax effects of Tax Reform for the reporting period in which Tax Reform was enacted. See Note 9 for a discussion of the impact of this ASU. Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted Topic 842 In February 2016, the FASB issued “Leases (Topic 842),” (Topic 842) to increase the transparency and comparability among organizations by recognizing lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet and disclosing key information about leasing arrangements. This new standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. We will adopt this new standard on January 1, 2019, and we expect to use the optional transition method, which allows us to recognize a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings at the date of adoption. We are enhancing our contracting and lease evaluation systems and related processes, and we are developing a new lease accounting system to capture our leases and support the required disclosures. During 2018, we will continue to monitor the adoption process to ensure compliance with accounting and disclosure requirements. We also continue the integration of our lease accounting system with our general ledger, and we will make modifications to the related procurement and payment processes. We anticipate this standard will have a material impact on our financial position by increasing our assets and liabilities by equal amounts through the recognition of right-of-use assets and lease liabilities for our operating leases. However, we do not expect adoption to have a material impact on our results of operations or liquidity. We expect our accounting for capital leases to remain substantially unchanged. ASU No. 2017-12 In August 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-12, “Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815),” (ASU No. 2017-12) to improve and simplify accounting guidance for hedge accounting. The provisions of this ASU are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. We use economic hedges to manage commodity price risk; however, we have not designated these hedges as fair value or cash flow hedges. As a result, the adoption of ASU No. 2017-12 effective January 1, 2019 is not expected to affect our financial position or results of operations. 8 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Peru Acquisition On May 14, 2018 , we acquired 100 percent of the issued and outstanding equity interests in Pure Biofuels del Peru S.A.C. (Pure Biofuels) from Pegasus Capital Advisors L.P. and various minority equity holders (collectively, the sellers). Pure Biofuels markets refined petroleum products through a network of logistics assets throughout Peru. Pure Biofuels owns a terminal at the Port of Callao, near Lima, with approximately 1 million barrels of storage capacity for refined petroleum and renewable products. Through one of its subsidiaries, Pure Biofuels also owns a 180,000 -barrel storage terminal in Paita, in northern Peru, which is scheduled to commence operations later in 2018. We paid $471 million from available cash on hand, of which $122 million was for working capital. The amount paid for working capital is subject to adjustment pending the final working capital settlement that is expected to be completed in the third quarter of 2018. This acquisition, which is referred to as the Peru Acquisition, is consistent with our general business strategy and broadens the geographic diversity of our refining and marketing network. The following table summarizes the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, which are preliminary and subject to change after the completion of an independent appraisal and other evaluations (in millions). Deferred charges and other assets primarily include identifiable intangible assets of $210 million and goodwill of $228 million . Identifiable intangible assets, which consist of customer contracts and relationships, are expected to be amortized on a straight-line basis over ten years . Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the consideration transferred over the estimated fair values of the underlying tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill represents the future economic benefits expected to be recognized from our expansion into the South American refined petroleum products market arising from other assets acquired that were not individually identified and separately recognized. We determined that the entire balance of goodwill is related to the refining segment. None of the goodwill is expected to be deductible for tax purposes. The Peru Acquisition purchase agreement provides for a potential earn-out payment based on Pure Biofuels’ earnings for the period from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021 , or if certain events occur, for the period from January 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020 . The sellers are entitled to receive the contingent earn-out payments if certain financial metrics are achieved by Pure Biofuels. As of June 30, 2018, we did not record a contingent liability with respect to this earn-out agreement based on our preliminary estimate of its fair value. 9 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Other Disclosures Our consolidated statements of income include the results of operations of Pure Biofuels since the date of acquisition, and such results are reflected in the refining segment. Results of operations since the date of acquisition, supplemental pro forma financial information, and acquisition-related costs have not been presented for the Peru Acquisition as such information is not material to our results of operations. Inventories consisted of the following (in millions): As of June 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017 , the replacement cost (market value) of LIFO inventories exceeded their LIFO carrying amounts by $3.9 billion and $3.0 billion , respectively, and our non-LIFO inventories accounted for $1.1 billion and $1.0 billion , respectively, of our total inventories. Debt During the six months ended June 30, 2018 , the following activity occurred: 10 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The IEnova Revolver matures in February 2028 . However, IEnova may terminate the IEnova Revolver at any time and demand repayment of all outstanding amounts; therefore, such amounts are reflected in current portion of debt. The IEnova Revolver is available only to the operations of Central Mexico Terminals, and the creditors of Central Mexico Terminals do not have recourse against Valero. Outstanding borrowings under the IEnova Revolver bear interest at the three-month LIBO rate for the applicable interest period in effect from time to time plus the applicable margin. The interest rate under the IEnova Revolver is subject to adjustment, with agreement by both parties, based upon changes in market conditions. As of June 30, 2018, the variable rate was 5.958 percent. During the six months ended June 30, 2017 , we had no significant debt activity. We had outstanding borrowings, letters of credit issued, and availability under our credit facilities as follows (amounts in millions and currency in U.S. dollars, except as noted): ___________________ Letters of credit issued as of June 30, 2018 expire at various times in 2018 through 2020 . As of June 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017 , the variable interest rate on the accounts receivable sales facility was 2.7009 percent and 2.0387 percent, respectively. 11 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Other Disclosures Interest and debt expense, net of capitalized interest is comprised of the following (in millions): Commitments MVP Terminal We have a 50 percent membership interest in MVP Terminalling, LLC (MVP), a Delaware limited liability company formed in September 2017 with a subsidiary of Magellan Midstream Partners LP (Magellan), to construct, own, and operate the Magellan Valero Pasadena marine terminal (MVP Terminal) located adjacent to the Houston Ship Channel in Pasadena, Texas. Construction of phases one and two of the project began in 2017 with a total estimated cost of $840 million of which we have committed to contribute 50 percent (approximately $420 million ). The project could expand up to four phases with a total project cost of approximately $1.4 billion if warranted by additional demand and agreed to by Magellan and us. Since inception, we have contributed $185 million to MVP of which $104 million was contributed during the six months ended June 30, 2018 . Concurrent with the formation of MVP, we entered into a terminaling agreement with MVP to utilize the MVP Terminal upon completion of phase two, which is expected to occur in early 2020. The terminaling agreement has an initial term of 12 years with two five -year automatic renewals, and year-to-year renewals thereafter. Due to our membership interest in MVP and because we determined that the terminaling agreement was a capital lease, we are the accounting owner of the MVP Terminal during the construction period. Accordingly, as of June 30, 2018 , we recorded an asset of $370 million in property, plant, and equipment representing 100 percent of the construction costs incurred by MVP, as well as capitalized interest incurred by us, and a long-term liability of $186 million payable to Magellan. The amounts recorded for the portion of the construction costs associated with the payable to Magellan are noncash investing and financing items, respectively. Central Texas Pipeline We have committed to a 40 percent undivided interest in a project with a subsidiary of Magellan to jointly build an estimated 135 -mile, 20 -inch refined petroleum products pipeline with a capacity of up to 150,000 barrels per day from Houston to Hearne, Texas. The pipeline is expected to be completed in mid-2019. The estimated cost of our 40 percent undivided interest in this pipeline is $170 million . Since inception, capital expenditures have totaled $49 million , of which $42 million was spent during the six months ended June 30, 2018 . 12 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Sunrise Pipeline System Effective January 31, 2018, we entered into a joint ownership agreement with Sunrise Pipeline LLC, a subsidiary of Plains All American Pipeline, L.P. (Plains), that provides us a 20 percent undivided interest in the Sunrise Pipeline System expansion to be constructed by Plains. The Sunrise Pipeline System is expected to contain (i) an estimated 255 -mile, 24 -inch crude oil pipeline (the Sunrise Pipeline) that originates at Plains’ terminal in Midland, Texas and ends at Plains’ station in Wichita Falls, Texas with throughput capacity of approximately 500,000 barrels per day, and (ii) two 270,000 shell barrel capacity tanks located at the Colorado City, Texas station. The Sunrise Pipeline System expansion is currently under construction and is expected to be placed in service in 2019. The estimated cost of our 20 percent undivided interest in the Sunrise Pipeline System is $135 million . Capital expenditures totaled $103 million for the six months ended June 30, 2018 . Environmental Matters We are involved, together with several other companies, in an environmental cleanup in the Village of Hartford, Illinois (the Village) and during 2015, one of these companies assumed the ongoing environmental cleanup in the Village pursuant to a federal court order. We had previously conducted an initial response in the Village, along with other companies, pursuant to an administrative order issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The parties involved in the initial response may have further claims among themselves for costs already incurred. We also continue to be engaged in site assessment and interim measures at our shutdown refinery site, which is adjacent to the Village. During the second quarter of 2018, we entered into a consent order with the Illinois EPA that we anticipate will be approved by the state court. In the consent order, we have assumed the underlying liability for full cleanup of our shutdown refinery site. As a result, we recorded an adjustment to our existing environmental liability related to this matter, which did not materially affect our financial position or results of operations as of or for the three and six months ended June 30, 2018 . We continue to seek contribution under Illinois law in state court and are pursuing claims under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act in federal court from other potentially responsible parties. Factors underlying the expected cost of the cleanup are subject to change from time to time, and actual results may vary significantly from the current estimate. Litigation Matters We are party to claims and legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. We have not recorded a loss contingency liability with respect to some of these matters because we have determined that it is remote that a loss has been incurred. For other matters, we have recorded a loss contingency liability where we have determined that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and that the loss is reasonably estimable. These loss contingency liabilities are not material to our financial position. We re-evaluate and update our loss contingency liabilities as matters progress over time, and we believe that any changes to the recorded liabilities will not be material to our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. Texas City Refinery Fire In April 2018, our Texas City Refinery experienced a fire in its alkylation unit. The costs to respond to and assess the damage caused by the fire are included in other operating expenses in the statements of income. This incident did not have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. 13 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Reconciliation of Balances The following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of equity attributable to our stockholders, equity attributable to noncontrolling interests, and total equity (in millions): ___________________ Share Activity There was no significant share activity during the six months ended June 30, 2018 and 2017 . Common Stock Dividends On July 20, 2018 , our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.80 per common share payable on September 5, 2018 to holders of record at the close of business on August 7, 2018 . 14 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss by component, net of tax, were as follows (in millions): Consolidated VIEs We consolidate a VIE when we have a variable interest in an entity for which we are the primary beneficiary. Our significant consolidated VIE’s include: The VIEs’ assets can only be used to settle their own obligations and the VIEs’ creditors have no recourse to our assets. We do not provide financial guarantees to our VIEs. Although we have provided credit facilities to some of our VIEs in support of their construction or acquisition activities, these transactions are eliminated 15 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) in consolidation. Our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows are impacted by our consolidated VIEs’ performance, net of intercompany eliminations, to the extent of our ownership interest in each VIE. The following tables present summarized balance sheet information for the significant assets and liabilities of our VIEs, which are included in our balance sheets (in millions). Non-Consolidated VIEs We hold variable interests in VIEs that have not been consolidated because we are not considered the primary beneficiary. These non-consolidated VIEs are not material to our financial position or results of operations and are primarily accounted for as equity investments. MVP is one of our non-consolidated VIEs and is accounted for under owner accounting as described in Note 5 . As of June 30, 2018 , our maximum exposure to loss was $185 million , which represents our equity investment in MVP. We have not provided any financial support to MVP other than amounts previously required by our membership interest. 16 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The components of net periodic benefit cost (credit) related to our defined benefit plans were as follows (in millions): The components of net periodic benefit cost (credit) other than the service cost component ( i.e. , the non-service cost components) are included in the line item other income (expense), net in the statements of income. We contributed $16 million and $14 million , respectively, to our pension plans and $9 million and $13 million , respectively, to our other postretirement benefit plans during the six months ended June 30, 2018 and 2017 . Management has elected to increase the discretionary contributions to our pension plans by $10 million during the second half of 2018, resulting in expected contributions to our pension plans of approximately $141 million for 2018, which includes discretionary contributions of $110 million . Our anticipated contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans during 2018 have not changed from the amount previously disclosed in our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2017 . 17 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) On December 22, 2017, Tax Reform was enacted, which resulted in significant changes to the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the Code), and was effective beginning on January 1, 2018. Tax Reform introduced significant and complex changes to the Code, and regulatory guidance from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is needed in order to properly account for many of the changes. In response, the SEC issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118, “Income Tax Accounting Implications of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act,” that was codified through the issuance of ASU No. 2018-05 as described in Note 1 , which requires that the effects of Tax Reform be recorded for items where the accounting is complete, as well as for items where a reasonable estimate can be made (referred to as provisional amounts). For items where reasonable estimates cannot be made, provisional amounts should not be recorded and those items should continue to be accounted for under the Code prior to changes from Tax Reform until a reasonable estimate can be made. We recorded the effects of Tax Reform for the year ended December 31, 2017 in accordance with ASU No. 2018-05, which included provisional amounts associated with the one-time transition tax on the deemed repatriation of previously undistributed accumulated earnings and profits of our international subsidiaries. We also identified items where reasonable estimates could not be made at that time. We did not revise our initial provisional estimate during the three and six months ended June 30, 2018 , and we have not completed our accounting for the income tax effects of Tax Reform. We continue to gather additional information in order to revise our initial estimates and await regulatory guidance from the IRS. We anticipate this information and guidance will be available in the second half of 2018 and that any adjustments will be recorded at that time. 18 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Earnings per common share were computed as follows (dollars and shares in millions, except per share amounts): 19 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Participating securities include restricted stock and performance awards granted under our 2011 Omnibus Stock Incentive Plan. Revenue from Contracts with Customers Disaggregation of Revenue Revenue is presented in the table below under “Segment Information” disaggregated by product because this is the level of disaggregation that management has determined to be beneficial to users of the financial statements. Receivables from Contracts with Customers Our receivables from contracts with customers are included in receivables, net and totaled $5.7 billion as of June 30, 2018 and January 1, 2018. 20 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Remaining Performance Obligations The majority of our contracts with customers are spot contracts and therefore have no remaining performance obligations. All of our remaining contracts with customers are primarily term contracts, the majority of which expire by 2020 . The transaction price for these term contracts includes an immaterial fixed amount and variable consideration ( i.e. , a commodity price). The variable consideration is allocated entirely to a wholly unsatisfied promise to transfer a distinct good that forms part of a single performance obligation; therefore, the variable consideration is not included in the remaining performance obligation. As of June 30, 2018 , after excluding contracts with an original expected duration of one year or less, the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to our remaining performance obligations was immaterial as the transaction price for these contracts includes only an immaterial fixed amount. Segment Information We have three reportable segments – refining, ethanol, and VLP. Each segment is a strategic business unit that offers different products and services by employing unique technologies and marketing strategies and whose operations and operating performance are managed and evaluated separately. Operating performance is measured based on the operating income generated by the segment, which includes revenues and expenses that are directly attributable to the management of the respective segment. Intersegment sales are generally derived from transactions made at prevailing market rates. The following is a description of each segment’s business operations. Operations that are not included in any of the reportable segments are included in the corporate category. 21 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The following table reflects the components of operating income by reportable segment (in millions): 22 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) 23 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The following table provides a disaggregation of revenues by reportable segment (in millions). Refining and ethanol segment revenues are disaggregated for our principal products, and VLP segment revenues are disaggregated by activity type. Total assets by reportable segment were as follows (in millions): 24 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) In order to determine net cash provided by operating activities, net income is adjusted by, among other things, changes in current assets and current liabilities as follows (in millions): Cash flows related to interest and income taxes were as follows (in millions): There were no significant noncash investing and financing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2018 . Noncash investing and financing activities during the six months ended June 30, 2017 included the recognition of capital lease assets and related obligations totaling approximately $490 million for the lease of storage tanks located at three of our refineries. 25 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Recurring Fair Value Measurements The following tables present information (in millions) about our assets and liabilities recognized at their fair values in our balance sheets categorized according to the fair value hierarchy of the inputs utilized by us to determine the fair values as of June 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017 . We have elected to offset the fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty, including any related cash collateral assets or obligations as shown below; however, fair value amounts by hierarchy level are presented in the following tables on a gross basis. We have no derivative contracts that are subject to master netting arrangements that are reflected gross on the balance sheet. 26 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) A description of our assets and liabilities recognized at fair value along with the valuation methods and inputs we used to develop their fair value measurements are as follows: 27 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) There were no transfers between levels for assets and liabilities held as of June 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017 that were measured at fair value on a recurring basis. There was no significant activity during the three and six months ended June 30, 2018 and 2017 related to the fair value amounts categorized in Level 3 as of June 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017 . Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements There were no assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of June 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017 . Other Financial Instruments Financial instruments that we recognize in our balance sheets at their carrying amounts are shown in the following table along with their associated fair values (in millions): 28 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) We are exposed to market risks primarily related to the volatility in the price of commodities, and foreign currency exchange rates, and the price of credits needed to comply with various government and regulatory programs. We enter into derivative instruments to manage some of these risks, including derivative instruments related to the various commodities we purchase or produce, and foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts, as described below under “Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk.” These derivative instruments are recorded as either assets or liabilities measured at their fair values (see Note 13 ), as summarized below under “Fair Values of Derivative Instruments,” with changes in fair value recognized currently in income. The effect of these derivative instruments on our income is summarized below under “Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income.” Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk Commodity Price Risk We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined petroleum products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including futures, swaps, and options. We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our hedging and trading operations. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. To manage commodity price risk, we use economic hedges, which are not designated as fair value or cash flow hedges, and we use fair value and cash flow hedges from time to time. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes. Our objectives for entering into hedges or trading derivatives are described below. 29 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) As of June 30, 2018 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were used as economic hedges, as well as commodity derivative instruments related to the physical purchase of corn at a fixed price. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels, except those identified as corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels and soybean oil contracts that are presented in thousands of pounds). 30 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) As of June 30, 2018 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into for trading purposes. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels, except those identified as corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels). We had no commodity derivative contracts outstanding as of June 30, 2018 and 2017 or during the three and six months ended June 30, 2018 and 2017 that were designated as fair value or cash flow hedges. Foreign Currency Risk We are exposed to exchange rate fluctuations on transactions entered into by our international operations that are denominated in currencies other than the local (functional) currencies of those operations. To manage our exposure to these exchange rate fluctuations, we use foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts. These contracts are not designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes and therefore are classified as economic hedges. As of June 30, 2018 , we had forward contracts to purchase $487 million of U.S. dollars. All of these commitments matured on or before July 31, 2018 . Environmental Compliance Program Price Risk We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory environmental compliance programs. To manage this risk, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. Certain of these programs require us to blend biofuels into the products we produce, and we are subject to such programs in most of the countries in which we operate. These countries set annual quotas for the percentage of biofuels that must be blended into the motor fuels consumed in these countries. As a producer of motor fuels from petroleum, we are obligated to blend biofuels into the products we produce at a rate that is at least equal to the applicable quota. To the degree we are unable to blend at the applicable rate, we must purchase biofuel credits (primarily RINs in the U.S.). We are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits, and we manage that risk by purchasing biofuel credits when prices are deemed 31 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) favorable. The cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was $131 million and $255 million for the three months ended June 30, 2018 and 2017 , respectively, and $337 million and $401 million for the six months ended June 30, 2018 and 2017 , respectively. These amounts are reflected in cost of materials and other. We are subject to additional requirements under greenhouse gas (GHG) emission programs, including the cap-and-trade systems, as discussed in Note 13 . Under these cap-and-trade systems, we purchase various GHG emission credits available on the open market. Therefore, we are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits. The cost to implement certain provisions of the cap-and-trade systems are significant; however, we recovered the majority of these costs from our customers for the three and six months ended June 30, 2018 and 2017 and expect to continue to recover the majority of these costs in the future. For the three and six months ended June 30, 2018 and 2017 , the net cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was immaterial. Fair Values of Derivative Instruments The following tables provide information about the fair values of our derivative instruments as of June 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017 (in millions) and the line items in the balance sheets in which the fair values are reflected. See Note 13 for additional information related to the fair values of our derivative instruments. As indicated in Note 13 , we net fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty under master netting arrangements, including cash collateral assets and obligations. The following tables, however, are presented on a gross asset and gross liability basis, which results in the reflection of certain assets in liability accounts and certain liabilities in asset accounts. 32 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Market Risk Our price risk management activities involve the receipt or payment of fixed price commitments into the future. These transactions give rise to market risk, which is the risk that future changes in market conditions may make an instrument less valuable. We closely monitor and manage our exposure to market risk on a daily basis in accordance with policies approved by our board of directors. Market risks are monitored by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy. We do not require any collateral or other security to support derivative instruments into which we enter. We also do not have any derivative instruments that require us to maintain a minimum investment-grade credit rating. Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income The following tables provide information about the gain or loss recognized in income on our derivative instruments and the line items in the statements of income in which such gains and losses are reflected (in millions). 33 Table of Contents ITEM 2. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS CAUTIONARY STATEMENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF SAFE HARBOR PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995 This Form 10-Q, including without limitation our disclosures below under the heading “OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK , ” includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. You can identify our forward-looking statements by the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “expect,” “plan,” “intend,” “scheduled,” “estimate,” “project,” “projection,” “predict,” “budget,” “forecast,” “goal,” “guidance,” “target,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “will,” “may,” and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements include, among other things, statements regarding: We based our forward-looking statements on our current expectations, estimates, and projections about ourselves and our industry. We caution that these statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that we cannot predict. In addition, we based many of these forward-looking statements on assumptions about future events that may prove to be inaccurate. Accordingly, our actual results may differ materially from the future performance that we have expressed or forecast in the forward-looking statements. Differences between actual results and any future performance suggested in these forward-looking statements could result from a variety of factors, including the following: 34 Table of Contents Any one of these factors, or a combination of these factors, could materially affect our future results of operations and whether any forward-looking statements ultimately prove to be accurate. Our forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and actual results and future performance may differ materially from those suggested in any forward-looking statements. We do not intend to update these statements unless we are required by the securities laws to do so. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing. We undertake no obligation to publicly release any revisions to any such forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. This Form 10-Q includes references to financial measures that are not defined under U.S. GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures include adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders, refining and ethanol segment margin, and adjusted operating income. We have included these non-GAAP financial measures to help facilitate the comparison of operating results between periods. See the accompanying financial tables in “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” and note (g) to the accompanying tables for reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial 35 Table of Contents measures. Also in note (g), we disclose the reasons why we believe our use of the non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information. OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK Overview Second Quarter Results For the second quarter of 2018 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders of $845 million compared to $548 million for the second quarter of 2017 , which represents an increase of $297 million . Excluding the adjustments to net income attributable to Valero stockholders reflected in the table on page 40 , adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders was $928 million for the second quarter of 2018 , an increase of $380 million compared to the second quarter of 2017 . This increase is primarily due to higher  operating income between the periods, net of the resulting increase in income tax expense. Operating income was $1.3 billion for the second quarter of 2018 compared to $860 million for the second quarter of 2017 , which represents an increase of $393 million . Excluding the adjustments to operating income reflected in the table on page 40 , adjusted operating income for the second quarter of 2018 was $1.3 billion , an increase of $470 million compared to the second quarter of 2017 . The $470 million increase in adjusted operating income is primarily due to the following: First Six Months Results For the first six months of 2018 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders of $1.3 billion compared to $853 million for the first six months of 2017 , which represents an increase of $461 million . Excluding the adjustments to net income attributable to Valero stockholders reflected in the table on page 50 , adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders was $1.4 billion for the first six months of 2018 , an increase of $506 million compared to the first six months of 2017 . This increase is primarily due to higher operating income between the periods, net of the resulting increase in income tax expense. Operating income was $2.1 billion for the first six months of 2018 compared to $1.4 billion for the first six months of 2017 , which represents an increase of $666 million . Excluding the adjustments to operating income 36 Table of Contents reflected in the table on page 50 , adjusted operating income for the first six months of 2018 was $2.0 billion , an increase of $635 million compared to the first six months of 2017 . The $635 million increase in adjusted operating income is primarily due to the following: Outlook Below are several factors that have impacted or may impact our results of operations during the third quarter of 2018 : 37 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following tables highlight our results of operations, our operating performance, and market reference prices that directly impact our operations. In addition, these tables include financial measures that are not defined under U.S. GAAP and represent non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are reconciled to their most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures and include adjusted net income attributable to Valero Energy Corporation stockholders, adjusted operating income, and refining and ethanol segment margin. In note (g) to these tables, we disclose the reasons why we believe our use of non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information. Second Quarter Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (millions of dollars) ___________________ See note references on pages 54 through 56 . 38 Table of Contents Second Quarter Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (continued) (millions of dollars) ___________________ See note references on pages 54 through 56 . 39 Table of Contents Second Quarter Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (continued) (millions of dollars) There were no adjustments to operating income for the second quarter of 2017 . See operating income by segment for the second quarter of 2017 on page 39. ___________________ See note references on pages 54 through 56 . 40 Table of Contents Second Quarter Results - Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) ___________________ See note references on pages 54 through 56 . 41 Table of Contents Second Quarter Results - Ethanol Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) Second Quarter Results - VLP Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) ___________________ See note references on pages 54 through 56 . 42 Table of Contents Second Quarter Results - Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) 43 Table of Contents Total Company, Corporate, and Other Revenues increased $8.8 billion in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 primarily due to increases in refined petroleum product prices associated with our refining segment. This improvement in revenues was partially offset by higher cost of sales and general and administrative expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) between the periods, resulting in an increase in operating income of $393 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 . Excluding the adjustments to operating income for the second quarter of 2018 reflected in the table on page 40 , adjusted operating income was $1.3 billion for the second quarter of 2018 compared to $860 million for the second quarter of 2017 . Details regarding the $470 million increase in adjusted operating income between the periods are discussed by segment below. Other income (expense), net decreased $32 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 primarily due to a $38 million charge from the early redemption of debt, as more fully described in note (e) to the accompanying tables (see page 54 ), partially offset by higher equity in earnings associated with our Diamond Pipeline joint venture. Income tax expense increased $53 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 primarily as a result of higher income before income tax expense, partially offset by a decrease in our effective tax rate. Our effective tax rate was 22 percent for the second quarter of 2018 compared to 26 percent for the second quarter of 2017 . The lower effective tax rate for the second quarter of 2018 is primarily due to the reduction in the U.S. statutory income tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent effective January 1, 2018 as a result of Tax Reform, which is more fully described in Note 9 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Refining Segment Results Refining segment revenues increased $8.7 billion in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 primarily due to increases in refined petroleum product prices. This improvement in refining segment revenues was partially offset by higher cost of sales between the periods, resulting in an increase in refining segment operating income of $442 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 . Excluding the adjustments to refining segment operating income from the second quarter of 2018 reflected in the table on page 40 , adjusted refining segment operating income was $1.4 billion for the second quarter of 2018 , an increase of $463 million compared to the second quarter of 2017 . This increase is primarily due to higher refining segment margin, as outlined below. Refining segment margin, as defined in note (g) to the accompanying tables (see page 54 ), increased $470 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 , primarily due to the following: 44 Table of Contents margins per barrel in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 had a favorable impact to our refining segment margin of approximately $413 million. 45 Table of Contents of $4.65 per barrel. We estimate that the decrease in gasoline margins per barrel in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 had an unfavorable impact to our refining segment margin of approximately $133 million. Ethanol Segment Results Ethanol segment revenues increased $59 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 primarily due to increases in corn related co-product prices. This improvement in ethanol segment revenues was partially offset by higher cost of sales between the periods, resulting in an increase in ethanol segment operating income of $12 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 . This increase is primarily due to higher ethanol segment margins, as outlined below. Ethanol segment margin, as defined in note (g) to the accompanying tables (see page 54 ), increased $15 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 , primarily due to the following: 46 Table of Contents VLP Segment Results VLP segment revenues increased $25 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 primarily due to incremental revenues generated from transportation and terminaling services associated with assets acquired by VLP in November 2017 that were formerly a part of the refining segment. This increase in VLP segment revenues was partially offset by increases in other components of cost of sales, resulting in an increase in VLP segment operating income of $12 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 . The components of this increase, along with the reasons for the changes in these components, are discussed below. VLP segment revenues increased $25 million in the second quarter of 2018 , as previously noted, primarily due to incremental transportation and terminaling revenues from the Port Arthur terminal and Parkway pipeline, which VLP acquired from Valero in November 2017. The incremental revenues generated by these assets had a favorable impact to VLP segment revenues of $22 million. VLP segment cost of sales increased $13 million primarily due to the costs to operate the Port Arthur terminal and the Parkway pipeline and depreciation expense associated with these assets. VLP acquired these assets in November 2017. Corporate and Eliminations Corporate and eliminations, which consists primarily of general and administrative expenses and related depreciation and amortization expense, increased by $73 million in the second quarter of 2018 compared to the second quarter of 2017 . Excluding the environmental reserve adjustment of $56 million for the second quarter of 2018 reflected in the table on page 40 , adjusted corporate and eliminations increased by $17 million primarily due to an increase in employee-related expenses. 47 Table of Contents First Six Months Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (millions of dollars) ___________________ See note references on pages 54 through 56 . 48 Table of Contents First Six Months Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (continued) (millions of dollars) ___________________ See note references on pages 54 through 56 . 49 Table of Contents First Six Months Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (continued) (millions of dollars) There were no adjustments to operating income for the first six months of 2017. See operating income by segment for the first six months of 2017 on page 49. ___________________ See note references on pages 54 through 56 . 50 Table of Contents First Six Months Results - Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) ___________________ See note references on pages 54 through 56 . 51 Table of Contents First Six Months Results - Ethanol Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) First Six Months Results - VLP Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) ___________________ See note references on pages 54 through 56 52 Table of Contents First Six Months Results - Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) 53 Table of Contents The following notes relate to references on pages 38 through 42 and 48 through 52 . We have defined these non-GAAP measures and believe they are useful to the external users of our financial statements, including industry analysts, investors, lenders, and rating agencies. We believe these measures are useful to assess our ongoing financial performance because, when reconciled to their most comparable U.S. GAAP measures, they provide improved comparability between periods through the exclusion of certain items that we believe are not indicative of our core operating performance and that may obscure our underlying business results and trends. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered as alternatives to their most comparable U.S. GAAP measures nor should they be considered in isolation or as a substitute for an analysis of our results of operations as reported under U.S. GAAP. In addition, these non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies because we may define them differently, which diminishes their utility. Non-GAAP measures are as follows: 54 Table of Contents our belief with respect to each excluded item is provided below. 55 Table of Contents All per barrel of throughput and per gallon of production amounts are calculated by dividing the associated dollar amount by the throughput volumes, production volumes, pipeline transportation throughput volumes, or terminaling throughput volumes for the period, as applicable. Throughput volumes, production volumes, pipeline transportation throughput volumes, and terminaling throughput volumes are calculated by multiplying throughput volumes per day, production volumes per day, pipeline transportation throughput volumes per day, and terminaling throughput volumes per day, respectively, by the number of days in the applicable period. Total Company, Corporate, and Other Revenues increased $13.4 billion in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 primarily due to increases in refined petroleum product prices associated with our refining segment. This improvement in revenues was partially offset by higher cost of sales and general and administrative expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) between the periods, resulting in an increase in operating income of $666 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 . Excluding the adjustments to operating income for the first six months of 2018 reflected in the table on page 50 , adjusted operating income was $2.0 billion for the first six months of 2018 compared to $1.4 billion for the first six months of 2017 . Details regarding the $635 million increase in adjusted operating income between the periods are discussed by segment below. Other income (expense), net decreased $7 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 primarily due to a $38 million charge from the early redemption of debt as more fully described in note (e) to the accompanying tables (see page 54 ), partially offset by higher equity in earnings associated with our Diamond Pipeline joint venture. Income tax expense increased $90 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 primarily as a result of higher income before income tax expense, partially offset by a decrease in our effective tax rate. Our effective tax rate was 21 percent for the first six months of 2018 compared to 26 percent for the first six months of 2017 . The lower effective tax rate for the first six months of 2018 is primarily due to the reduction in the U.S. statutory income tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent effective January 1, 2018 as a result of Tax Reform, which is more fully described in Note 9 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Net income attributable to non-controlling interests increased by $103 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 primarily due to a benefit of $80 million for the blender’s tax credit as more fully described in note (a) to the accompanying tables (see page 54 ). Refining Segment Results Refining segment revenues increased $13.4 billion in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 primarily due to increases in refined petroleum product prices. This improvement in refining segment revenues was partially offset by higher cost of sales between the periods, resulting in an increase 56 Table of Contents in refining segment operating income of $724 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 . Excluding the adjustments to refining segment operating income for the first six months of 2018 reflected in the tables on page 50 , adjusted refining segment operating income was $2.2 billion for the first six months of 2018 , an increase of $585 million compared to the first six months of 2017 . The components of this increase, along with reasons for the changes in these components, are outlined below. Refining segment margin, as defined in note (g) to the accompanying tables (see page 54 ), increased $597 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 , primarily due to the following: 57 Table of Contents that we processed during the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 had a favorable impact to our refining segment margin of approximately $59 million. Refining segment depreciation and amortization expense associated with our cost of sales increased $16 million primarily due to an increase in refinery turnaround and catalyst amortization expense in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 . Ethanol Segment Results Ethanol segment revenues increased $37 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 primarily due to increases in corn related co-product prices. This improvement in ethanol segment revenues was offset by slightly higher cost of sales between the periods, resulting in an increase in ethanol segment operating income of $35 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 . This increase is primarily due to higher ethanol segment margins, as outlined below. Ethanol segment margin, as defined in note (g) to the accompanying tables (see page 54 ), increased $31 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 , primarily due to the following: 58 Table of Contents related co-product prices had a favorable impact to our ethanol segment margin of approximately $75 million. VLP Segment Results VLP segment revenues increased $51 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 primarily due to incremental revenues generated from transportation and terminaling services associated with assets acquired by VLP in November 2017 that were formerly a part of the refining segment. This increase in VLP segment revenues was partially offset by increases in other components of cost of sales, resulting in an increase in VLP segment operating income of $26 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 . The components of this increase, along with the reasons for the changes in these components, are discussed below. VLP segment revenues increased $51 million in the first six months of 2018 , as previously noted, primarily due to incremental transportation and terminaling revenues from the Port Arthur terminal and Parkway pipeline, which VLP acquired from Valero in November 2017. The incremental revenues generated by these assets had a favorable impact to VLP segment revenues of $44 million. VLP segment cost of sales increased $25 million primarily due to the costs to operate the Port Arthur terminal and the Parkway pipeline and depreciation expense associated with these assets. VLP acquired these assets in November 2017. Corporate and Eliminations Corporate and eliminations, which consists primarily of general and administrative expenses and related depreciation and amortization expense, increased by $119 million in the first six months of 2018 compared to the first six months of 2017 . Excluding the environmental reserve adjustment of $108 million for the first six months of 2018 reflected in the table on page 50 , adjusted corporate and eliminations increased by $11 million primarily due an increase in employee-related expenses. 59 Table of Contents LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Liquidity We believe that we have sufficient funds from operations and, to the extent necessary, from borrowings under our credit facilities, to fund our ongoing operating requirements. We expect that, to the extent necessary, we can raise additional funds from time to time through equity or debt financings in the public and private capital markets or the arrangement of additional credit facilities. However, there can be no assurances regarding the availability of any future financings or additional credit facilities or whether such financings or additional credit facilities can be made available on terms that are acceptable to us. Our liquidity consisted of the following as of June 30, 2018 (in millions): ___________________ Cash Flows Summary Components of our cash flows are set forth below (in millions): Cash Flows for the Six Months Ended June 30, 2018 Our operations generated $2.2 billion of cash in the first six months of 2018 , driven primarily by net income of $1.5 billion and noncash charges to income for depreciation and amortization expense of $1.0 billion , partially offset by a negative change in working capital of $445 million . See “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for further discussion of our operations. The change in our working capital is further detailed in Note 12 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The use of cash resulting from the $445 million change in working capital was mainly due to a decrease in income taxes payable resulting from the $400 million payment of our fourth quarter 2017 estimated taxes in January 2018. 60 Table of Contents The $2.2 billion of cash generated by our operations, along with (i) $1.3 billion in proceeds from debt issuances and borrowings (as further discussed in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements) and (ii) $1.4 billion from available cash on hand, were used mainly to: Cash Flows for the Six Months Ended June 30, 2017 Our operations generated $2.8 billion of cash in the first six months of 2017 , driven primarily by net income of $893 million , noncash charges to income of $999 million related to depreciation and amortization expense, and a positive change in working capital of $859 million . See “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for further discussion of our operations. The change in our working capital is further detailed in Note 12 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The source of cash resulting from the $859 million change in working capital was mainly due to: The $2.8 billion of cash generated by our operations, along with (i) net proceeds of $36 million from VLP’s sale of common units representing limited partner interests to the public and (ii) $108 million from the effects of a favorable change in foreign exchange rates, were used mainly to: Summary of Credit Facilities Information about our outstanding borrowings, letters of credit issued, and availability under our credit facilities is reflected in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Capital Resources Capital Investments Our anticipated capital investments for 2018 have not changed from the amounts previously disclosed in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017 as we expect to incur approximately $2.7 billion for 61 Table of Contents capital investments, which includes capital expenditures, turnaround and catalyst costs, and investments in joint ventures. Capital expenditures include the capital expenditures of our consolidated subsidiaries and consolidated VIEs in which we hold an ownership interest. This consists of approximately $1.7 billion for stay-in-business capital and $1.0 billion for growth strategies. This capital investment estimate excludes potential strategic acquisitions, including acquisitions of undivided interests. We continuously evaluate our capital budget and make changes as conditions warrant. In addition to our capital investments noted above, we separately reflect in our statements of cash flows the capital expenditures of certain VIEs that we consolidate even though we do not hold an ownership interest in them. These expenditures are not included in our $2.7 billion estimate of capital investments for 2018. See Note 7 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our VIEs. Other Matters Impacting Liquidity and Capital Resources Stock Purchase Program On January 23, 2018 , our board of directors authorized our purchase of up to an additional $2.5 billion of our outstanding common stock (the 2018 program) with no expiration date. This authorization was in addition to the remaining amount available under a $2.5 billion program authorized on September 21, 2016 (the 2016 program). As of June 30, 2018 , we had approximately $3.2 billion of authorization remaining available under our programs. We have no obligation to make purchases under these programs. Pension Plan Funding Management has elected to increase the discretionary contributions to our pension plans by $10 million during the second half of 2018, resulting in expected contributions to our pension plans of approximately $141 million for 2018, which now includes discretionary contributions of $110 million . Our plan to also contribute approximately $19 million to our other postretirement benefit plans during 2018 remains unchanged. Environmental Matters Our operations are subject to extensive environmental regulations by governmental authorities relating to the discharge of materials into the environment, waste management, pollution prevention measures, GHG emissions, and characteristics and composition of gasolines and distillates. Because environmental laws and regulations are becoming more complex and stringent and new environmental laws and regulations are continuously being enacted or proposed, the level of future expenditures required for environmental matters could increase in the future. In addition, any major upgrades in any of our operating facilities could require material additional expenditures to comply with environmental laws and regulations. See Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of our environmental matters. Tax Matters The IRS has ongoing audits related to our U.S. federal income tax returns from 2010 through 2015. We have received Revenue Agent Reports in connection with the 2010 and 2011 combined audit. We have made significant progress in resolving this audit, which we believe will be settled within the next 12 months. Upon settlement, we anticipate receiving a refund; therefore, we have a receivable associated with this audit as of June 30, 2018. We do not expect to have a significant change to our uncertain tax positions upon the settlement of our ongoing audits, and we believe that the ultimate settlement of our audits will not be material to our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. We continue to evaluate both provisional and incomplete estimates due to Tax Reform related to our 2017 tax provision. As discussed in Note 9 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, there have been no updates to these amounts as of June 30, 2018 . 62 Table of Contents Cash Held by Our International Subsidiaries In conjunction with our implementation of the provisions under Tax Reform, which was enacted on December 22, 2017 and described in Note 9 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we recorded a liability in 2017 for the estimated U.S. federal tax due on the deemed repatriation of the accumulated earnings and profits of our international subsidiaries not previously distributed to us, and we will pay this liability over the eight-year period permitted by the provisions under Tax Reform. Because of the deemed repatriation of these accumulated earnings and profits, there are no longer any U.S. federal income tax consequences associated with the repatriation of any of the $2.4 billion of cash and cash equivalents held by our international subsidiaries as of June 30, 2018 . However, certain countries in which our international subsidiaries are organized impose withholding taxes on cash distributed outside of those countries. We have accrued for withholding taxes on the portion of the cash held by one of our international subsidiaries that we have deemed not to be permanently reinvested in our operations in that country. Cash provided by operating activities in the U.S. continues to be our primary source of funds to finance our U.S. operations and capital expenditures, as well as our dividends and share repurchases. Concentration of Customers Our operations have a concentration of customers in the refining industry and customers who are refined petroleum product wholesalers and retailers. These concentrations of customers may impact our overall exposure to credit risk, either positively or negatively, in that these customers may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other conditions. However, we believe that our portfolio of accounts receivable is sufficiently diversified to the extent necessary to minimize potential credit risk. Historically, we have not had any significant problems collecting our accounts receivable. CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS As of June 30, 2018 , our contractual obligations included debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations, and other long-term liabilities. There were no material changes outside the ordinary course of business with respect to our contractual obligations during the six months ended June 30, 2018 . However, in the ordinary course of business, we had various debt-related activities during the six months ended June 30, 2018 as described in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Our debt and financing agreements do not have rating agency triggers that would automatically require us to post additional collateral. However, in the event of certain downgrades of our senior unsecured debt by the ratings agencies, the cost of borrowings under some of our bank credit facilities and other arrangements would increase. All of our ratings on our senior unsecured debt are at or above investment grade level as follows: We cannot provide assurance that these ratings will remain in effect for any given period of time or that one or more of these ratings will not be lowered or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency. We note that these credit ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities. Each rating should be evaluated 63 Table of Contents independently of any other rating. Any future reduction below investment grade or withdrawal of one or more of our credit ratings could have a material adverse impact on our ability to obtain short- and long-term financing and the cost of such financings. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. As of June 30, 2018 , there were no significant changes to our critical accounting policies since the date our annual report on Form 10‑K for the year ended December 31, 2017 was filed. COMMODITY PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined petroleum products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including swaps, futures, and options to manage the volatility of: We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our price risk activities. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes to take advantage of existing market conditions related to future results of operations and cash flows. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. We prepared a sensitivity analysis of open positions of our commodity derivative instruments. As of June 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017 , the amount of gain or loss in the fair value of commodity derivative instruments that would have resulted from a 10 percent increase or decrease in the underlying price of the contracts was not material. See Note 14 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for notional volumes associated with these derivative contracts as of June 30, 2018 . COMPLIANCE PROGRAM PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of biofuel credits and GHG emission credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. To manage these risks, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are 64 Table of Contents derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. As of June 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017 , the amount of gain or loss in the fair value of derivative instruments that would have resulted from a 10 percent increase or decrease in the underlying price of the contracts was not material. See Note 14 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion about these compliance programs. INTEREST RATE RISK The following table provides information about our debt instruments (dollars in millions), the fair values of which are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Principal cash flows and related weighted-average interest rates by expected maturity dates are presented. ____________________ FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK As of June 30, 2018 , we had commitments to purchase $487 million of U.S. dollars. Our market risk was minimal on these contracts, as all of them matured on or before July 31, 2018 . 65 Table of Contents Our management has evaluated, with the participation of our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in             Rule 13a-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) as of the end of the period covered by this report, and has concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of June 30, 2018 . There has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during our last fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. We continue the implementation process to prepare for the adoption of Topic 842, which we discuss in Note 1 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. We expect that there will be changes affecting our internal control over financial reporting in conjunction with adopting this standard. The most significant changes we expect relate to the implementation of a lease evaluation system and a lease accounting system, including the integration of our lease accounting system with our general ledger and modifications to the related procurement and payment processes. 66 Table of Contents PART II – OTHER INFORMATION The information below describes new proceedings or material developments in proceedings that we previously reported in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017 . Litigation We incorporate by reference into this Item our disclosures made in Part I, Item 1 of this report included in Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under the caption “Environmental Matters” and “Litigation Matters.” Environmental Enforcement Matters While it is not possible to predict the outcome of the following environmental proceedings, if any one or more of them were decided against us, we believe that there would be no material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. We are reporting these proceedings to comply with SEC regulations, which require us to disclose certain information about proceedings arising under federal, state, or local provisions regulating the discharge of materials into the environment or protecting the environment if we reasonably believe that such proceedings will result in monetary sanctions of $100,000 or more. People of the State of Illinois, ex rel. v. The Premcor Refining Group Inc., et al. , Third Judicial Circuit Court, Madison County (Case No. 03-CH-00459, filed May 29, 2003) (Hartford Refinery and terminal). In our quarterly report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2018, we reported that the Illinois EPA had filed suit against The Premcor Refining Group Inc. alleging violations of air and waste regulations at Premcor’s Hartford, Illinois terminal and closed refinery. During the second quarter of 2018, we entered into a consent order with the Illinois EPA resolving all outstanding issues pending with the state. This consent order has been lodged with the court and is pending the court’s confirmation. Our litigation with other potentially responsible parties (PRPs) remains ongoing and we are continuing to assert our various defenses, limitations and potential rights for contribution from the other PRPs. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) (Port Arthur). During the second quarter of 2018, we received a Notice of Enforcement from the TCEQ alleging unauthorized emissions associated with the November 18, 2017 release of crude oil from the 24-inch fill pipe of Tank T-285. We are working with the TCEQ to resolve this matter. 67 Table of Contents There have been no changes from the risk factors disclosed in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017 . ___________________ 68 Table of Contents ___________________ Certain agreements relating to our long-term debt have not been filed as exhibits as permitted by paragraph                                        (b)(4)(iii)(A) of Item 601 of Regulation S-K since the total amount of securities authorized under any such agreements do not exceed 10 percent of our total consolidated assets. Upon request, we will furnish to the SEC all constituent agreements defining the rights of holders of our long-term debt not filed herewith. 69 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. Date: August 6, 2018 70