10-Q 1 vloform10-qx3312014.htm 10-Q VLO Form 10-Q - 3.31.2014 Table of Contents UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q (Mark One) For the Quarterly Period Ended March 31, 2014 OR Commission File Number 1-13175 VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) One Valero Way San Antonio, Texas (Address of principal executive offices) 78249 (Zip Code) (210) 345-2000 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes R No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes R No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes o No R The number of shares of the registrant’s only class of common stock, $0.01 par value, outstanding as of April 30, 2014 was 533,624,161 . VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION TABLE OF CONTENTS i Table of Contents PART I – FINANCIAL INFORMATION Item 1. Financial Statements VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS (Millions of Dollars, Except Par Value) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 1 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME (Millions of Dollars, Except Per Share Amounts) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 2 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (Millions of Dollars) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 3 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (Millions of Dollars) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 4 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Basis of Presentation As used in this report, the terms “Valero,” “we,” “us,” or “our” may refer to Valero Energy Corporation, one or more of its consolidated subsidiaries, or all of them taken as a whole. These unaudited financial statements have been prepared in accordance with United States (U.S.) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for interim financial information and with the instructions to Form 10-Q and Article 10 of Regulation S-X of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and notes required by U.S. GAAP for complete financial statements. In the opinion of management, all adjustments considered necessary for a fair presentation have been included. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature unless disclosed otherwise. Financial information for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 included in these Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements is derived from our unaudited financial statements. Operating results for the three months ended March 31, 2014 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the year ending December 31, 2014. The balance sheet as of December 31, 2013 has been derived from our audited financial statements as of that date. For further information, refer to our financial statements and notes thereto included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 . Significant Accounting Policies Use of Estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we review our estimates based on currently available information. Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates. Income Taxes In July 2013, the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 740, “Income Taxes,” were amended to provide specific guidance on the financial statement presentation of an unrecognized tax benefit when a net operating loss carryforward, a similar tax loss, or a tax credit carryforward exists at the reporting date. The amendment requires entities to present an unrecognized tax benefit as a reduction to the deferred tax asset generated by the net operating loss carryforward, similar tax loss, or tax credit carryforward, if such items are available to be used to offset the unrecognized tax benefit. These provisions are effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2013 and should be applied prospectively to all unrecognized tax benefits that exist at the effective date, with retrospective application permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2014 did not affect our financial position or results of operations, nor did it require any additional disclosures. New Accounting Pronouncement In April 2014, the provisions of ASC Topic 205, “Presentation of Financial Statements,” and ASC Topic 360, “Property, Plant, and Equipment,” were amended to change the criteria for reporting discontinued operations. The provisions of these amendments modify the definition of discontinued operations by limiting discontinued operations reporting to disposals of components of an entity that represent strategic shifts that have or will have a major effect on an entity’s operations and financial results. These amendments require additional disclosures about discontinued operations and new disclosures for other disposals of individually 5 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) material components of an organization that do not meet the definition of a discontinued operation. In addition, the guidance allows companies to have significant continuing involvement and continuing cash flows with the discontinued operation. These provisions are effective prospectively for annual reporting periods beginning on or after December 15, 2014, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2015 will not affect our financial position or results of operations; however, it may result in changes to the manner in which future dispositions of operations or assets, if any, are presented in our financial statements, or it may require additional disclosures. In July 2013, we formed Valero Energy Partners LP (VLP), a master limited partnership, to own, operate, develop, and acquire crude oil and refined petroleum products pipelines, terminals, and other transportation and logistics assets. On December 16, 2013 , VLP completed its initial public offering (the Offering) of 17,250,000 common units at a price of $23.00 per unit. VLP received $369 million in net proceeds from the sale of the units, after deducting underwriting fees, structuring fees, and other offering costs. VLP’s assets include crude oil and refined petroleum products pipeline and terminal systems in the U.S. Gulf Coast and U.S. Mid-Continent regions that are integral to the operations of our Port Arthur, McKee, and Memphis Refineries. As of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , we owned a 68.6 percent limited partner interest and a 2 percent general partner interest in VLP, and the public owned a 29.4 percent limited partner interest. VLP’s cash and temporary cash investments were $384 million and $375 million as of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , respectively. Valero consolidates the financial statements of VLP into its financial statements and as such, VLP’s cash and temporary cash investments are included in Valero’s consolidated cash and temporary cash investments. However, VLP’s cash and temporary cash investments can be used only to settle its obligations. In addition, VLP’s partnership capital attributable to the public’s ownership interest in VLP of $372 million and $370 million as of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , respectively, is reflected in noncontrolling interests. We have agreements with VLP that establish fees for certain general and administrative services, and operational and maintenance services provided by us. In addition, we have a master transportation services agreement and a master terminal services agreement with VLP where VLP provides commercial transportation and terminaling services to us. These transactions are eliminated in consolidation. 6 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Inventories consisted of the following (in millions): As of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , the replacement cost (market value) of last in, first out (LIFO) inventories exceeded their LIFO carrying amounts by approximately $7.1 billion and $6.9 billion , respectively. As of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , our non-LIFO inventories accounted for $924 million and $851 million , respectively, of our total inventories. Credit Facilities Revolver We have a $3 billion revolving credit facility (the Revolver) that has a maturity date of November 2018 . We have the option to increase the aggregate commitments under the Revolver to $4.5 billion , subject to, among other things, the consent of the existing lenders whose commitments will be increased or any additional lenders providing such additional capacity. The Revolver has certain restrictive covenants, including a maximum debt-to-capitalization ratio of 60 percent. As of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , our debt-to-capitalization ratios, calculated in accordance with the terms of the Revolver, were 14 percent and 12 percent, respectively. We believe that we will remain in compliance with this covenant. VLP Revolver VLP has a $300 million senior unsecured revolving credit facility agreement (the VLP Revolver) that has a maturity date of December 2018 . The VLP Revolver is available only to the operations of VLP, and creditors of VLP do not have recourse against Valero. VLP has the option to increase the aggregate commitments under the VLP Revolver to $500 million , subject to, among other things, the consent of the existing lenders whose commitments will be increased or any additional lenders providing such additional capacity. VLP’s obligations under the VLP Revolver will be jointly and severally guaranteed by all of VLP’s directly owned material subsidiaries. As of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , the only guarantor under the VLP Revolver was Valero Partners Operating Co. LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of VLP. The VLP Revolver has certain restrictive covenants, including a ratio of total debt to EBITDA (as defined in the VLP Revolver) for the prior four fiscal quarters of not greater than 5.0 to 1.0 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter, and limitations on VLP’s ability to pay distributions to its unitholders. As of March 31, 2014 , VLP’s debt to EBITDA ratio, calculated in accordance with the terms of the VLP Revolver, was 0.1 to 1.0. We believe that VLP will remain in compliance with this covenant. 7 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Canadian Facility In addition to the Revolver and the VLP Revolver, one of our Canadian subsidiaries has a C$50 million committed revolving credit facility under which it may borrow and obtain letters of credit that has a maturity date of November 2014 . Activities Under Our Credit Facilities During the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 , we had no borrowings or repayments under the Revolver, the VLP Revolver, or our Canadian revolving credit facility. As of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , we had no borrowings outstanding under the Revolver, the VLP Revolver, or our Canadian revolving credit facility. We had outstanding letters of credit under our committed lines of credit as follows (in millions): As of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , we had $414 million and $189 million , respectively, of letters of credit outstanding under our uncommitted short-term bank credit facilities. Non-Bank Debt We made no scheduled debt repayments during the three months ended March 31, 2014 , but we made a scheduled debt repayment of $200 million related to our 4.75% senior notes in April 2014. During the three months ended March 31, 2013 , we made a scheduled debt repayment of $180 million related to our 6.7% senior notes. Accounts Receivable Sales Facility We have an accounts receivable sales facility with a group of third-party entities and financial institutions to sell up to $1.5 billion of eligible trade receivables on a revolving basis. In July 2013, we amended this facility to extend the maturity date to July 2014 . Proceeds from the sale of receivables under this facility are reflected as debt. Under this program, one of our marketing subsidiaries (Valero Marketing) sells eligible receivables, without recourse, to another of our subsidiaries (Valero Capital), whereupon the receivables are no longer owned by Valero Marketing. Valero Capital, in turn, sells an undivided percentage ownership interest in the eligible receivables, without recourse, to the third-party entities and financial institutions. To the extent that Valero Capital retains an ownership interest in the receivables it has purchased from Valero Marketing, such interest is included in our financial statements solely as a result of the consolidation of the financial statements of Valero Capital with those of Valero Energy Corporation; the receivables are not available to satisfy the claims of the creditors of Valero Marketing or Valero Energy Corporation. 8 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) During the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 , we had no proceeds from or repayments under our accounts receivable sales facility. As of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , we had $100 million outstanding under our accounts receivable sales facility. Capitalized Interest Capitalized interest was $17 million and $40 million for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Environmental Matter We are involved, together with several other companies, in an environmental cleanup in the Village of Hartford, Illinois (the Village) and the adjacent shutdown refinery site, which we acquired as part of a prior acquisition. In cooperation with some of the other companies, we have been conducting initial mitigation and cleanup response pursuant to an administrative order issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The EPA is seeking further cleanup obligations from us and other potentially responsible parties for the Village. In parallel with the Village cleanup, we are also in litigation with the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and other potentially responsible parties relating to the remediation of the shutdown refinery site. In each of these matters, we have various defenses and rights for contribution from the other responsible parties. We have accrued for our own expected contribution obligations. However, because of the unpredictable nature of these cleanups and the methodology for allocation of liabilities, it is reasonably possible that we could incur a loss in a range of $0 to $200 million in excess of the amount of our accrual to ultimately resolve these matters. Factors underlying this estimated range are expected to change from time to time, and actual results may vary significantly from this estimate. Litigation Matters We are party to claims and legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. We have not recorded a loss contingency liability with respect to some of these matters because we have determined that it is remote that a loss has been incurred. For other matters, we have recorded a loss contingency liability where we have determined that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and that the loss is reasonably estimable. These loss contingency liabilities are not material to our financial position. We re-evaluate and update our loss contingency liabilities as matters progress over time, and we believe that any changes to the recorded liabilities will not be material to our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. Aruba Refinery During 2012, we suspended the operations of the Aruba Refinery and recognized an impairment loss with respect to all of the refinery’s long-lived assets, except for certain terminal assets that we continue to operate. We have not, however, abandoned the refinery. Should we ultimately decide to abandon the refinery, we may be required under our land lease agreement with the Government of Aruba to dismantle and remove the abandoned assets. This would require us to recognize an asset retirement obligation that would be charged to expense. We do not expect these amounts to be material to our financial position or results of operations. 9 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Reconciliation of Balances The following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of equity attributable to our stockholders, equity attributable to the noncontrolling interests, and total equity (in millions): The noncontrolling interests relate to third-party ownership interests in VLP and two joint venture companies whose financial statements we consolidate due to our controlling interests. 10 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Share Activity Activity in the number of shares of common stock and treasury stock was as follows (in millions): Common Stock Dividends On May 1, 2014 , our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $ 0.25 per common share payable on June 18, 2014 to holders of record at the close of business on May 21, 2014 . Income Tax Effects related to Components of Other Comprehensive Income The tax effects allocated to each component of other comprehensive income (loss) were as follows (in millions): 11 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income Changes in accumulated other comprehensive income by component, net of tax, were as follows  (in millions): 12 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Amounts reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and into net income were as follows (in millions): _________________________ 13 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) The components of net periodic benefit cost related to our defined benefit plans were as follows (in millions) : In February 2013, we announced changes to certain of our U.S. qualified pension plans that cover the majority of our U.S. employees who work in our refining segment and corporate operations. Benefits under our primary pension plan changed from a final average pay formula to a cash balance formula with staged effective dates that commence either on July 1, 2013 or January 1, 2015 depending on the age and service of the affected employees. All final average pay benefits will be frozen as of December 31, 2014, with all future benefits to be earned under the new cash balance formula. These plan amendments resulted in a $328 million decrease to pension liabilities and a related increase to other comprehensive income during the three months ended March 31, 2013. The benefit of this remeasurement will be amortized into income through 2025 . Our anticipated contributions to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans during 2014 have not changed from amounts previously disclosed in our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2013. We contributed $10 million and $8 million , respectively, to our pension plans and $4 million and $4 million , respectively, to our other postretirement benefit plans during the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 . 14 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Earnings per common share were computed as follows (dollars and shares in millions, except per share amounts): 15 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) The following table reflects potentially dilutive securities (in millions) that were excluded from the calculation of “earnings per common share – assuming dilution” as the effect of including such securities would have been antidilutive. Stock options were excluded from weighted-average common shares outstanding – assuming dilution because the exercise price of the stock option was greater than the average market price of our common shares during each reporting period. In May 2013, we completed the separation of our retail business, creating an independent public company named CST Brands, Inc. (CST), and as a result, we no longer operate a retail business or report retail segment operating results. Segment activity related to our retail business prior to the separation is reflected in the retail segment results below. Motor fuel sales to CST (our former retail business), which were eliminated in consolidation prior to the separation, are reported as refining segment operating revenues from external customers after May 1, 2013. The following table reflects activity related to our reportable segments (in millions): 16 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Total assets by reportable segment were as follows (in millions): In March 2014, we purchased an idled corn ethanol plant in Mount Vernon, Indiana for $34 million from a wholly owned subsidiary of Aventine Renewable Energy Holdings, Inc. We expect to resume production during the third quarter of 2014. We will finalize our purchase accounting once a determination of the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is available, pending the completion of independent appraisals and other evaluations. In order to determine net cash provided by operating activities, net income is adjusted by, among other things, changes in current assets and current liabilities as follows (in millions): The above changes in current assets and current liabilities differ from changes between amounts reflected in the applicable balance sheets for the respective periods for the following reasons: 17 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) There were no significant noncash investing or financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 . Cash flows related to interest and income taxes were as follows (in millions): General GAAP requires that certain assets and liabilities be measured at fair value on a recurring or nonrecurring basis in our balance sheets, which are presented below under “Recurring Fair Value Measurements” and “Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements.” Recurring fair value measurements of assets or liabilities are those that GAAP requires or permits in the balance sheet at the end of each reporting period, such as derivative financial instruments. Nonrecurring fair value measurements of assets or liabilities are those that GAAP requires or permits in the balance sheet in particular circumstances, such as the impairment of property, plant and equipment. GAAP also requires the disclosure of the fair values of financial instruments when an option to elect fair value accounting has been provided, but such election has not been made. A debt obligation is an example of such a financial instrument. The disclosure of the fair values of financial instruments not recognized at fair value in our balance sheet is presented below under “Other Financial Instruments.” GAAP provides a framework for measuring fair value and establishes a three-level fair value hierarchy that prioritizes inputs to valuation techniques based on the degree to which objective prices in external active markets are available to measure fair value. Following is a description of each of the levels of the fair value hierarchy. 18 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) developed based on the best information available in the circumstances, which might include occasional market quotes or sales of similar instruments or our own financial data such as internally developed pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies, as well as instruments for which the fair value determination requires significant judgment. Recurring Fair Value Measurements The tables below present information (in millions) about our assets and liabilities recognized at their fair values in our balance sheets categorized according to the fair value hierarchy of the inputs utilized by us to determine the fair values as of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 . We have elected to offset the fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty, including any related cash collateral assets or obligations as shown below; however, fair value amounts by hierarchy level are presented on a gross basis in the tables below. We have no derivative contracts that are subject to master netting arrangements that are reflected gross on the balance sheet. 19 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) A description of our assets and liabilities recognized at fair value along with the valuation methods and inputs we used to develop their fair value measurements are as follows: 20 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) denominated in currencies other than the local (functional) currencies of those operations. These contracts are valued based on quoted prices from the exchange and are categorized in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. There were no transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 for assets and liabilities held as of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 that were measured at fair value on a recurring basis. There was no activity during the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 related to the fair value amounts categorized in Level 3 as of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 . Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements There were no assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 . Other Financial Instruments Financial instruments that we recognize in our balance sheets at their carrying amounts are shown in the table below (in millions): The methods and significant assumptions used to estimate the fair value of these financial instruments are as follows: 21 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of commodities, interest rates, and foreign currency exchange rates. We enter into derivative instruments to manage some of these risks, including derivative instruments related to the various commodities we purchase or produce, interest rate swaps, and foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts, as described below under “Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk.” These derivative instruments are recorded as either assets or liabilities measured at their fair values (see Note 11 ), as summarized below under “Fair Values of Derivative Instruments.” In addition, the effect of these derivative instruments on our income is summarized below under “Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income and Other Comprehensive Income.” When we enter into a derivative instrument, it is designated as a fair value hedge, a cash flow hedge, an economic hedge, or a trading derivative. The gain or loss on a derivative instrument designated and qualifying as a fair value hedge, as well as the offsetting loss or gain on the hedged item attributable to the hedged risk, is recognized currently in income in the same period. The effective portion of the gain or loss on a derivative instrument designated and qualifying as a cash flow hedge is initially reported as a component of other comprehensive income and is then recorded into income in the period or periods during which the hedged forecasted transaction affects income. The ineffective portion of the gain or loss on the cash flow derivative instrument, if any, is recognized in income as incurred. For our economic hedges (derivative instruments not designated as fair value or cash flow hedges) and for derivative instruments entered into by us for trading purposes, the derivative instrument is recorded at fair value and changes in the fair value of the derivative instrument are recognized currently in income. The cash flow effects of all of our derivative instruments are reflected in operating activities in our statements of cash flows for all periods presented. We are also exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. To manage this risk, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk Commodity Price Risk We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including futures, swaps, and options. We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our hedging and trading operations. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by a risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. For risk management purposes, we use fair value hedges, cash flow hedges, and economic hedges. In addition to the use of derivative instruments to manage commodity price risk, we also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes. Our objective for entering into each type of hedge or trading derivative is described below. 22 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) As of March 31, 2014 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into to hedge crude oil and refined product inventories and commodity derivative instruments related to the physical purchase of crude oil and refined products at a fixed price. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels). As of March 31, 2014 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into to hedge forecasted purchases or sales of crude oil and refined products. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels). 23 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) As of March 31, 2014 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were used as economic hedges and commodity derivative instruments related to the physical purchase of corn at a fixed price. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels, except those identified as corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels, and soybean oil contracts that are presented in thousands of pounds). 24 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) As of March 31, 2014 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into for trading purposes. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes represent thousands of barrels, except those identified as natural gas contracts that are presented in billions of British thermal units and corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels). Interest Rate Risk Our primary market risk exposure for changes in interest rates relates to our debt obligations. We manage our exposure to changing interest rates through the use of a combination of fixed-rate and floating-rate debt. In addition, at times we have used interest rate swap agreements to manage our fixed to floating interest rate position by converting certain fixed-rate debt to floating-rate debt. We had no interest rate derivative instruments outstanding as of March 31, 2014 or December 31, 2013 , or during the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 . Foreign Currency Risk We are exposed to exchange rate fluctuations on transactions entered into by our international operations that are denominated in currencies other than the local (functional) currencies of those operations. To manage our exposure to these exchange rate fluctuations, we use foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts. These contracts are not designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes, and therefore they are classified as economic hedges. As of March 31, 2014 , we had commitments to purchase $999 million of 25 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) U.S. dollars. The majority of these commitments matured on or before April 30, 2014 , resulting in an immaterial loss in the second quarter of 2014. Compliance Program Price Risk We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. The most significant programs impacting our operations are those that require us to blend biofuels into the products we produce, and we are subject to such programs in most of the countries in which we operate. These countries set annual quotas for the percentage of biofuels that must be blended into the motor fuels consumed in these countries. As a producer of motor fuels from petroleum, we are obligated to blend biofuels into the products we produce at a rate that is at least equal to the applicable quota. To the degree we are unable to blend at the applicable rate, we must purchase biofuel credits (primarily RINs in the U.S.). We are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits, and we manage that risk by purchasing biofuel credits when prices are deemed favorable. The cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was $92 million and $130 million for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. These amounts are reflected in cost of sales. 26 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Fair Values of Derivative Instruments The following tables provide information about the fair values of our derivative instruments as of March 31, 2014 and December 31, 2013 (in millions) and the line items in the balance sheets in which the fair values are reflected. See Note 11 for additional information related to the fair values of our derivative instruments. As indicated in Note 11 , we net fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty under master netting arrangements, including cash collateral assets and obligations. The tables below, however, are presented on a gross asset and gross liability basis, which results in the reflection of certain assets in liability accounts and certain liabilities in asset accounts. 27 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Market and Counterparty Risk Our price risk management activities involve the receipt or payment of fixed price commitments into the future. These transactions give rise to market risk, which is the risk that future changes in market conditions may make an instrument less valuable. We closely monitor and manage our exposure to market risk on a daily basis in accordance with policies approved by our board of directors. Market risks are monitored by a risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy. Concentrations of customers in the refining industry may impact our overall exposure to counterparty risk because these customers may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other conditions. In addition, financial services companies are the counterparties in certain of our price risk management activities, and such financial services companies may be adversely affected by periods of uncertainty and illiquidity in the credit and capital markets. There were no material amounts due from counterparties in the refining or financial services industry as of March 31, 2014 or December 31, 2013 . We do not require any collateral or other security to support derivative instruments into which we enter. We also do not have any derivative instruments that require us to maintain a minimum investment-grade credit rating. 28 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income and Other Comprehensive Income The following tables provide information about the gain or loss recognized in income and other comprehensive income on our derivative instruments and the line items in the financial statements in which such gains and losses are reflected (in millions). For fair value hedges, no component of the derivative instruments’ gains or losses was excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 . There were no amounts recognized in income for hedged firm commitments that no longer qualified as fair value hedges during the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 . 29 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) For cash flow hedges, no component of the derivative instruments’ gains or losses was excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness for the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 . For the three months ended March 31, 2014 , cash flow hedges primarily related to forward purchases of crude oil, with $3 million of cumulative after-tax gains on cash flow hedges remaining in accumulated other comprehensive income. We estimate that this deferred gain will be reclassified into cost of sales over the next 12 months as a result of hedged transactions that are forecasted to occur. For the three months ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 , there were no amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income into income as a result of the discontinuance of cash flow hedge accounting. 30 Table of Contents CAUTIONARY STATEMENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF SAFE HARBOR PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995 This Form 10-Q, including without limitation our discussion below under the heading “OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK , ” includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. You can identify our forward-looking statements by the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “expect,” “plan,” “intend,” “estimate,” “project,” “projection,” “predict,” “budget,” “forecast,” “goal,” “guidance,” “target,” “could,” “should,” “may,” and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements include, among other things, statements regarding: We based our forward-looking statements on our current expectations, estimates, and projections about ourselves and our industry. We caution that these statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that we cannot predict. In addition, we based many of these forward-looking statements on assumptions about future events that may prove to be inaccurate. Accordingly, our actual results may differ materially from the future performance that we have expressed or forecast in the forward-looking statements. Differences between actual results and any future performance suggested in these forward-looking statements could result from a variety of factors, including the following: 31 Table of Contents Any one of these factors, or a combination of these factors, could materially affect our future results of operations and whether any forward-looking statements ultimately prove to be accurate. Our forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and actual results and future performance may differ materially from those suggested in any forward-looking statements. We do not intend to update these statements unless we are required by the securities laws to do so. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing. We undertake no obligation to publicly release any revisions to any such forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. 32 Table of Contents OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK Overview For the first quarter of 2014 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders of $828 million , or $1.54 per share (assuming dilution), compared to $654 million , or $1.18 per share (assuming dilution), for the first quarter of 2013 . The increase in net income attributable to Valero stockholders of $174 million was primarily due to the increase of $289 million in our operating income as outlined by business segment in the table below (in millions). The $67 million increase in refining segment operating income in the first quarter of 2014 compared to the first quarter of 2013 was primarily due to higher refining throughput margin per barrel and higher throughput volumes in most of our regions, partially offset by higher energy costs and higher depreciation expense between the periods. On May 1, 2013, we completed the separation of our retail business, creating an independent public company named CST Brands, Inc. (CST), and as a result, we no longer operate a retail business. Therefore, we did not have any retail segment operating results for the first quarter of 2014 , resulting in the $42 million decrease in retail segment operating income in the first quarter of 2014 compared to the first quarter of 2013 . Our ethanol segment operating income increased $229 million in the first quarter of 2014 compared to the first quarter of 2013 due to higher gross margin per gallon and higher production volumes. Significantly lower corn prices combined with higher ethanol prices quarter over quarter contributed to the increase in gross margin per gallon. Production volumes increased between the quarters in response to the improved ethanol gross margin per gallon. Additional analysis of the changes in the operating income of our business segments and other components of net income attributable to Valero stockholders is provided below under “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.” Outlook Our refining segment benefits from processing sour crude oils (such as Mars and Maya crude oil) and light sweet crude oils (such as West Texas Intermediate and Louisiana Light Sweet crude oil) due to the favorable discounts between the prices of these types of crude oil and the price of Brent crude oil. Because the market for refined products generally tracks the price of Brent crude oil, which is a benchmark sweet crude oil, we benefit when we process crude oils that are priced at a discount to Brent crude oil. The discounts in the prices of certain light sweet crude oils and sour crude oils compared to the price of Brent crude oil in the first quarter of 2014 widened compared to the first quarter of 2013 , which positively impacted our refining margins. Thus far in the second quarter of 2014, discounts on crude oils have shown mixed results compared to the first quarter of 2014 as some crude oil discounts have widened while others have narrowed, and we expect these discounts to remain volatile. Gasoline margins, which were seasonally weak during the first quarter of 2014 , have increased in the second quarter and look positive as the summer driving season 33 Table of Contents approaches. Energy markets and margins are volatile, and we expect them to continue to be volatile in the near to mid-term. Thus far in the second quarter of 2014, ethanol margins have narrowed substantially. This is primarily due to lower ethanol prices as the weather-related transportation issues that limited supplies and production in the first quarter of 2014 are being resolved. We expect lower average ethanol margins for the remainder of 2014 as compared to the first quarter of 2014 . RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following tables highlight our results of operations, our operating performance, and market prices that directly impact our operations. The narrative following these tables provides an analysis of our results of operations. Financial Highlights (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) ________________ See note references on page 38 . 34 Table of Contents Refining Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 38 . 35 Table of Contents Refining Operating Highlights by Region (c) (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 38 . 36 Table of Contents Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) _______________ See note references on page 38 . 37 Table of Contents Retail and Ethanol Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) _______________ See note references below. The following notes relate to references on pages 34 through 38 . General Operating revenues increased $189 million (or 1 percent ) in the first quarter of 2014 compared to the first quarter of 2013 primarily as a result of increased revenues from our ethanol segment due to an increase in both the price of ethanol and an increase in volumes quarter over quarter. Operating income increased $289 million in the first quarter of 2014 compared to the first quarter of 2013 primarily due to a $229 million increase in ethanol segment operating income and a $67 million increase in refining segment operating income, partially offset by a $42 million decrease in retail segment operating income. The reasons for these changes in the operating results of our segments and other items that affected our income are discussed below. Refining Refining segment operating income increased $67 million from $1.2 billion in the first quarter of 2013 to $1.3 billion in the first quarter of 2014 , primarily due to a $203 million increase in refining margin partially 38 Table of Contents offset by a $97 million increase in operating expenses and a $39 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense. Refining margin increased $203 million for the first quarter of 2014 compared to the first quarter of 2013 primarily due to the following: 39 Table of Contents unfavorable decrease of $1.81 per barrel. We estimate that the decline in distillate margins per barrel during the first quarter of 2014 compared to the first quarter of 2013 had a negative impact to our refining margin of approximately $100 million for all refining regions. The increase of $97 million in operating expenses was primarily due to a $74 million increase in energy costs related to higher natural gas prices ( $5.23 per MMBtu for the first quarter of 2014 compared to $3.43 per MMBtu for the first quarter of 2013), which were due to the severe winter weather in the U.S., and higher use of natural gas at our refineries. The increase of $39 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to additional depreciation expense of $12 million associated with the new hydrocracker at our St. Charles Refinery that began operating in July 2013 and an increase in refinery turnaround and catalyst amortization expense of $13 million resulting from the completion of turnaround projects at our Texas City and Quebec City Refineries. Ethanol Ethanol segment operating income was $243 million in the first quarter of 2014 compared to $14 million in the first quarter of 2013 . The $229 million increase in operating income was primarily due to a $282 million increase in gross margin (a $0.96 per gallon increase), partially offset by a $52 million increase in operating expenses. Ethanol gross margin per gallon increased to $1.38 per gallon in the first quarter of 2014 from $0.42 per gallon in the first quarter of 2013 primarily due to the following: The $52 million increase in operating expenses during the first quarter of 2014 was primarily due to a $39 million increase in natural gas expense primarily resulting from higher natural gas prices ( $5.23 per MMBtu for the first quarter of 2014 compared to $3.43 per MMBtu for the first quarter of 2013), which were due to the severe winter weather in the U.S. that caused a significant increase in regional natural gas 40 Table of Contents prices used by our plants, and a $6 million increase in chemical costs during the first quarter of 2014 due to higher production. Corporate Expenses and Other General and administrative expenses decreased $16 million from the first quarter of 2013 to the first quarter of 2014 . This decrease was primarily due to administrative expenses of $11 million in the first quarter of 2013 associated with our former retail business that did not recur due to the separation of that business in May 2013. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $19 million due to the loss of $20 million on the sale of certain corporate property in 2013. “Interest and debt expense, net of capitalized interest” for the first quarter of 2014 increased $17 million from the first quarter of 2013 . This increase was primarily due to a $23 million decrease in capitalized interest due to completion of several large capital projects including the new hydrocracker at our St. Charles Refinery, partially offset by a $6 million favorable impact from the decrease in average borrowings between the quarters. Income tax expense increased $89 million from the first quarter of 2013 to the first quarter of 2014 mainly as a result of higher income before income tax expense. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Cash Flows for the Three Months Ended March 31, 2014 and 2013 Net cash provided by operating activities for the first three months of 2014 was $244 million compared to $1.5 billion for the first three months of 2013 . The decrease in cash generated from operating activities was primarily due to unfavorable changes in current assets and current liabilities, partially offset by the $289 million increase in operating income discussed above under “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.” The changes in cash provided by or used in working capital during the first three months of 2014 and 2013 are shown in Note 10 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The net cash provided by operating activities during the first three months of 2014 and $645 million of available cash on hand was used mainly to: The net cash provided by operating activities during the first three months of 2013 was used mainly to: Capital Investments For 2014 , we expect to incur approximately $3.0 billion for capital investments of which approximately $700 million is for deferred turnaround and catalyst costs. The capital expenditure estimate excludes expenditures related to strategic business acquisitions. We continuously evaluate our capital budget and make changes as conditions warrant. 41 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations As of March 31, 2014 , our contractual obligations included debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, purchase obligations, and other long-term liabilities. There were no material changes outside the ordinary course of our business with respect to these contractual obligations during the three months ended March 31, 2014 . As of March 31, 2014 , we had an accounts receivable sales facility with a group of third-party entities and financial institutions to sell eligible trade receivables on a revolving basis up to $1.5 billion . Our debt and financing agreements do not have rating agency triggers that would automatically require us to post additional collateral. However, in the event of certain downgrades of our senior unsecured debt the ratings agencies, the cost of borrowings under some of our bank credit facilities and other arrangements would increase. As of April 30, 2014, all of our ratings on our senior unsecured debt are at or above investment grade level as follows: We cannot provide assurance that these ratings will remain in effect for any given period of time or that one or more of these ratings will not be lowered or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency. We note that these credit ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities and may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating agency. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Any future reduction below investment grade or withdrawal of one or more of our credit ratings could have a material adverse impact on our ability to obtain short- and long-term financing and the cost of such financings. Other Commercial Commitments As of March 31, 2014 , we had outstanding letters of credit under our committed lines of credit as follows (in millions): As of March 31, 2014 , we had no amounts borrowed under our revolving credit facilities. The letters of credit outstanding as of March 31, 2014 expire during 2014 and 2015. Other Matters Impacting Liquidity and Capital Resources Pension Plan Funding We plan to contribute approximately $38 million to our pension plans and $19 million to our postretirement plans during 2014 . 42 Table of Contents Stock Purchase Programs As of March 31, 2014 , we have approval under our $3 billion common stock purchase program to purchase approximately $2.4 billion of our common stock. Environmental Matters Our operations are subject to extensive environmental regulations by governmental authorities relating to the discharge of materials into the environment, waste management, pollution prevention measures, greenhouse gas emissions, and characteristics and composition of gasolines and distillates. Because environmental laws and regulations are becoming more complex and stringent and new environmental laws and regulations are continuously being enacted or proposed, the level of future expenditures required for environmental matters could increase in the future. In addition, any major upgrades in any of our operating facilities could require material additional expenditures to comply with environmental laws and regulations. See Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of our environmental matters. Tax Matters During the first quarter of 2014, we paid approximately $400 million in tax payments that related to 2013 and that were recorded in income taxes payable as of December 31, 2013. In addition, we currently believe the cash we will pay for income taxes for 2014 will increase and that such amount may exceed the total income tax expense that will be reflected on our statement of income. This belief is primarily based on an expected decrease in deductions that we will claim on our U.S. federal income tax return for depreciation on our property, plant, and equipment. In prior years, the U.S. federal government enacted certain legislation that provided for the deduction of depreciation on an accelerated basis on newly built equipment as a means of encouraging capital investment by businesses. This legislation, however, generally did not extend beyond 2013. Although we expect the amount of cash required to pay our 2014 income taxes to increase compared to recent years, we believe that we will generate sufficient cash from operations and have sufficient cash on hand to make our tax payments as they become due. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has ongoing tax audits related to our U.S. federal tax returns from 2002 through 2011 and we have received Revenue Agent Reports (RARs) in connection with the audits for tax years 2002 through 2009. We are vigorously contesting certain tax positions and assertions included in the RARs and we have made significant progress in resolving certain of these matters with the IRS. During the three months ended March 31, 2014 , we settled the audit related to the 2004 and 2005 tax years for a group of our subsidiaries consistent with the recorded amount of uncertain tax position liabilities associated with that audit. In addition, we expect to settle our audits for tax years 2002 through 2007 within the next 12 months and we believe they will be settled for amounts that do not exceed the recorded amounts of uncertain tax position liabilities associated with those audits. As a result, we have classified a portion of our uncertain tax position liabilities as a current liability. As of March 31, 2014 , the total amount of uncertain tax position liabilities, including related penalties and interest, was $433 million, with $236 million reflected as a current liability in income taxes payable and $197 million reflected in other long-term liabilities. Total uncertain tax position liabilities did not change significantly during the three months ended March 31, 2014 . Should we ultimately settle for amounts consistent with our estimates, we believe that we will have sufficient cash on hand at that time to make such payments. Cash Held by Our International Subsidiaries We operate in countries outside the U.S. through subsidiaries incorporated in these countries, and the earnings of these subsidiaries are taxed by the countries in which they are incorporated. We intend to reinvest these earnings indefinitely in our international operations even though we are not restricted from repatriating such earnings to the U.S. in the form of cash dividends. Should we decide to repatriate such earnings, we would 43 Table of Contents incur and pay taxes on the amounts repatriated. In addition, such repatriation could cause us to record deferred tax expense that could significantly impact our results of operations. We believe, however, that a substantial portion of our international cash can be returned to the U.S. without significant tax consequences through means other than a repatriation of earnings. As of March 31, 2014 , $920 million of our cash and temporary cash investments was held by our international subsidiaries. Concentration of Customers Our refining and marketing operations have a concentration of customers in the refining industry and customers who are refined product wholesalers and retailers. These concentrations of customers may impact our overall exposure to credit risk, either positively or negatively, in that these customers may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other conditions. However, we believe that our portfolio of accounts receivable is sufficiently diversified to the extent necessary to minimize potential credit risk. Historically, we have not had any significant problems collecting our accounts receivable. Sources of Liquidity We believe that we have sufficient funds from operations and, to the extent necessary, from borrowings under our credit facilities, to fund our ongoing operating requirements. We expect that, to the extent necessary, we can raise additional funds from time to time through equity or debt financings in the public and private capital markets or the arrangement of additional credit facilities. However, there can be no assurances regarding the availability of any future financings or additional credit facilities or whether such financings or additional credit facilities can be made available on terms that are acceptable to us. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. As of March 31, 2014 , there have been no significant changes to our critical accounting policies since our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 was filed. 44 Table of Contents COMMODITY PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including swaps, futures, and options to hedge: We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our hedging and trading operations. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes to take advantage of existing market conditions related to future results of operations and cash flows. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by a risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. The following sensitivity analysis includes all positions at the end of the reporting period with which we have market risk (in millions): See Note 12 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for notional volumes associated with these derivative contracts as of March 31, 2014 . COMPLIANCE PROGRAM PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of biofuel credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. To manage this risk, we enter into contracts to purchase 45 Table of Contents these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. As of March 31, 2014 , there was no gain or loss in the fair value of derivative instruments that would result from a 10 percent increase or decrease in the underlying price of the contracts.  See Note 12 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion about these compliance programs. INTEREST RATE RISK The following table provides information about our debt instruments, excluding capital lease obligations (dollars in millions), the fair values of which are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Principal cash flows and related weighted-average interest rates by expected maturity dates are presented. We had no interest rate derivative instruments outstanding as of March 31, 2014 or December 31, 2013 . FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK As of March 31, 2014 , we had commitments to purchase $999 million of U.S. dollars. Our market risk was minimal on these contracts, as the majority of them matured on or before April 30, 2014 , resulting in an immaterial loss in the second quarter of 2014. 46 Table of Contents Item 4. Controls and Procedures Our management has evaluated, with the participation of our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in             Rule 13a-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) as of the end of the period covered by this report, and has concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of March 31, 2014 . There has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during our last fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. PART II – OTHER INFORMATION The information below describes new proceedings or material developments in proceedings that we previously reported in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 . Litigation We hereby incorporate by reference into this Item our disclosures made in Part I, Item 1 of this Report included in Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under the caption “Litigation Matters.” Environmental Enforcement Matters While it is not possible to predict the outcome of the following environmental proceedings, if any one or more of them were decided against us, we believe that there would be no material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. We are reporting these proceedings to comply with SEC regulations, which require us to disclose certain information about proceedings arising under federal, state, or local provisions regulating the discharge of materials in the environment or protecting the environment if we reasonably believe that such proceedings will result in monetary sanctions of $100,000 or more. Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) (Benicia Refinery). We currently have multiple outstanding Violation Notices (VNs) issued by the BAAQMD in 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014, which we reasonably believe may result in penalties of $100,000 or more. These VNs are for various alleged air regulation and air permit violations at our Benicia Refinery and asphalt plant. In the first quarter of 2014, we settled multiple VNs issued in 2011. We continue to work with the BAAQMD to resolve the remaining VNs. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) (Port Arthur Refinery). In our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013, we reported that our Port Arthur Refinery had received a proposed agreed order from the TCEQ that assessed a penalty of $180,911 for various alleged air emission and reporting violations; a Notice of Enforcement (NOE) for unauthorized emissions with potential stipulated penalties of $166,000; and additional NOEs for which we had not received proposed penalty amounts, but reasonably believed may result in penalties of $100,000 or more. 47 Table of Contents In the first quarter of 2014, we received two proposed agreed orders from the TCEQ resolving multiple violations that occurred between May 2007 and April 2013, including all the unauthorized emissions, reporting violations and stipulated penalties referenced above.  We are working with the TCEQ to finalize these agreed orders. TCEQ (Port Arthur Refinery).  In the first quarter of 2014, we received an NOE for unauthorized emissions at our Port Arthur Refinery, for which we have not received a proposed penalty amount, but reasonably believe may result in penalties of $100,000 or more. Item 1A. Risk Factors There have been no material changes from the risk factors disclosed in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 . 48 Table of Contents Item 6. Exhibits 49 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. Date: May 8, 2014 50