10-Q 1 vloform10-qx9302016.htm 10-Q Document UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q (Mark One) For the quarterly period ended September 30, 2016 OR Commission File Number 1-13175 VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) One Valero Way San Antonio, Texas (Address of principal executive offices) 78249 (Zip Code) (210) 345-2000 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes o No þ The number of shares of the registrant’s only class of common stock, $0.01 par value, outstanding as of October 31, 2016 was 452,664,759 . VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION TABLE OF CONTENTS i Table of Contents PART I – FINANCIAL INFORMATION Item 1. Financial Statements VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS (Millions of Dollars, Except Par Value) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 1 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME (Millions of Dollars, Except Per Share Amounts) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 2 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (Millions of Dollars) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 3 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (Millions of Dollars) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 4 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Basis of Presentation As used in this report, the terms “Valero,” “we,” “us,” or “our” may refer to Valero Energy Corporation, one or more of its consolidated subsidiaries, or all of them taken as a whole. These unaudited financial statements have been prepared in accordance with United States (U.S.) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for interim financial information and with the instructions to Form 10-Q and Article 10 of Regulation S-X of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and notes required by U.S. GAAP for complete financial statements. In the opinion of management, all adjustments considered necessary for a fair presentation have been included. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature unless disclosed otherwise. Financial information for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 included in these Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements is derived from our unaudited financial statements. Operating results for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the year ending December 31, 2016. The balance sheet as of December 31, 2015 has been derived from our audited financial statements as of that date. For further information, refer to our financial statements and notes thereto included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 . Reclassifications Certain amounts reported as of December 31, 2015 have been reclassified in order to conform to the 2016 presentation, including the retrospective adoption of certain amendments to the Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) effective January 1, 2016. The adoption of the amendments to ASC Subtopic 835-30, “Interest–Imputation of Interest,” resulted in the reclassification of certain debt issuance costs from “deferred charges and other assets, net” to “debt and capital lease obligations, less current portion.” The adoption of the amendments to ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes” resulted in the reclassification of current deferred income tax assets and current deferred income tax liabilities to noncurrent deferred income tax liabilities. The following table presents our previously reported balance sheet line items retrospectively adjusted for the adoption of these pronouncements (in millions): 5 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Significant Accounting Policies Use of Estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we review our estimates based on currently available information. Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates. Accounting Pronouncements Adopted During the Period In February 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 810, “Consolidation,” were amended to improve consolidation guidance for certain types of legal entities. The guidance modifies the evaluation of whether limited partnerships and similar legal entities are variable interest entities (VIEs) or voting interest entities, eliminates the presumption that a general partner should consolidate a limited partnership, affects the consolidation analysis of reporting entities that are involved with VIEs, particularly those that have fee arrangements and related party relationships. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods. With the adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016, we determined that Valero Energy Partners LP (VLP) is a VIE. Since we previously consolidated the financial statements of VLP, the adoption of this guidance did not affect our financial position or results of operations. See Note 9 for disclosures related to our consolidated VIEs. In April 2015, the provisions of ASC Subtopic 835-30, “Interest–Imputation of Interest,” were amended to simplify the presentation of debt issuance costs. The guidance requires that debt issuance costs related to a note be reported in the balance sheet as a direct deduction from the face amount of that note, consistent with debt discounts, and that amortization of debt issuance costs be reported as interest expense. In August 2015, these provisions were further amended with guidance from the Securities and Exchange Commission staff, which provides that the staff would not object to an entity deferring and presenting debt issuance costs related to a line-of-credit arrangement as an asset and subsequently amortizing the deferred debt issuance costs ratably over the term of the line-of-credit arrangement, regardless of whether there are any outstanding borrowings on the line-of-credit arrangement. These provisions are to be applied retrospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 did not materially affect our financial position and did not affect our results of operations because we already reported the amortization of debt issuance costs as interest expense. See “Basis of Presentation–Reclassifications” above for the reclassified presentation in our balance sheet. Debt issuance costs associated with our line-of-credit arrangements will continue to be reported in the balance sheet as “deferred charges and other assets, net.” In May 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurements,” were amended to remove the requirement to categorize within the fair value hierarchy all investments for which fair value is measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient. The guidance also removes the requirement to make certain disclosures for all investments that are eligible to be measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient and limits those disclosures to investments for which the entity has elected to measure the fair value using that practical expedient. These provisions are to be applied retrospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 did not affect our financial position or results of operations. 6 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) In September 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 805, “Business Combinations,” were amended to simplify the accounting and reporting of adjustments made to provisional amounts recognized in a business combination. The amendment requires that an acquirer (i) record, in the same period’s financial statements, the effect on earnings of changes in depreciation, amortization, or other income effects, if any, as a result of the change to the provisional amounts, calculated as if the accounting had been completed at the acquisition date and (ii) present separately on the statement of income or disclose in the notes the portion of the amount recorded in current-period earnings by line item that would have been recorded in previous reporting periods if the adjustment to the provisional amounts had been recognized as of the acquisition date. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, and should be applied prospectively to adjustments made to provisional amounts that occur after the effective date. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 did not affect our financial position or results of operations; however, it may result in changes to the manner in which adjustments to provisional amounts recognized in a future business combination, if any, are presented in our financial statements. In November 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes,” were amended to simplify the presentation of deferred income taxes. The amendments require that deferred tax liabilities and assets be classified as noncurrent in a classified balance sheet. The amendments are effective for financial statements for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted as of the beginning of any interim or annual period. The amendments may be applied either prospectively to all deferred tax liabilities and assets or retrospectively to all periods presented. Entities applying the guidance retrospectively should disclose in the first interim and first annual period of adoption the nature of and reason for the change in accounting principle and quantitative information about the effects of the accounting change on prior periods. Effective January 1, 2016, we adopted this guidance on a retrospective basis, but such adoption did not materially affect our financial position and it did not impact our results of operations. See “Basis of Presentation–Reclassifications” above for the reclassified presentation. Adoption of this guidance simplifies the future presentation of our deferred income tax assets and liabilities. In March 2016, the provisions of ASC Topic 718, “Compensation–Stock Compensation,” were amended to simplify the accounting and reporting for employee share-based payments. These amendments involve several aspects of the accounting for share-based payment transactions, including accounting for income taxes as it pertains to the recognition of excess tax benefits and tax deficiencies in the statements of income, forfeitures, minimum statutory tax withholding requirements, as well as classification of excess tax benefits and employee taxes paid in the statement of cash flows. These provisions are effective for public companies for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. An entity that elects early adoption must adopt all of the amendments in the same period. The amendments provide specific transition and disclosure guidance for each provision. Effective January 1, 2016, we adopted this guidance on a prospective basis, and such adoption did not materially affect our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. Excess tax benefits, which were previously reported in cash flows from financing activities, are currently reported in cash flows from operating activities. 7 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted In May 2014, the ASC was amended and a new accounting standard, ASC Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” was issued to clarify the principles for recognizing revenue. The standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, including interim reporting periods within those annual periods. We have been evaluating and continue to evaluate the provisions of this standard and its impact on our business processes, business and accounting systems, and financial statements and related disclosures. A multi-disciplined implementation team has gained an understanding of the standard’s revenue recognition model, is completing the review and documentation of our contracts, and is analyzing whether enhancements are needed to our business and accounting systems. In July 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 330, “Inventory” were amended to simplify the measurement of inventory measured using the first-in, first-out or average cost methods. These provisions are to be applied prospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2017 will not affect our financial position or results of operations. In January 2016, the provisions of ASC Subtopic 825-10, “Financial Instruments–Overall,” were amended to enhance the reporting model for financial instruments regarding certain aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation, and disclosure. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim periods within those annual periods. We are currently evaluating the effect that adopting this standard will have on our financial statements and related disclosures. In February 2016, the ASC was amended and a new accounting standard, ASC Topic 842, “Leases,” was issued to increase the transparency and comparability among organizations by recognizing lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet and disclosing key information about leasing arrangements. The new standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. We have been evaluating and continue to evaluate the provisions of this standard and its impact on our business processes, business and accounting systems, and financial statements and related disclosures. A multi-disciplined implementation team has gained an understanding of the accounting and disclosure provisions of the standard and is in the process of analyzing the impacts to our business and accounting systems, including the development of new accounting systems to account for our leases and support the required disclosures. In October 2016, the provisions of ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes,” were amended to improve the accounting for the income tax consequences of intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory. The amendments require an entity to recognize the income tax consequences of intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory immediately when the transfer occurs. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The amendments should be applied on a modified retrospective basis with a cumulative-effect adjustment directly to retained earnings as of the beginning of the period of adoption for the recognition of income tax consequences of intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory that occur before the adoption date. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2018 is not expected to materially affect our financial position or results of operations; however, certain deferred charges associated with intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory will be reported in our balance sheet primarily as a reduction to our deferred income tax liabilities. 8 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) In October 2016, the provisions of ASC Topic 810, “Consolidation,” were amended to provide guidance on how a reporting entity that is a single decision maker of a variable interest entity (VIE) should treat indirect interests in the entity held through related parties that are under common control with the reporting entity when determining whether it is the primary beneficiary. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The amendments should be applied on a retrospective basis to all relevant prior periods beginning with the fiscal year in which the VIE guidance was adopted with a cumulative-effect adjustment directly to retained earnings as of the beginning of the period of adoption. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2017 will not affect our financial position or results of operations. Effective October 1, 2016, we (i) transferred ownership of all of our assets in Aruba, other than certain hydrocarbon inventories and working capital, to Refineria di Aruba N.V. (RDA), an entity wholly-owned by the Government of Aruba (GOA), (ii) settled our obligations under various agreements with the GOA, including agreements that required us to dismantle our leasehold improvements under certain conditions, and (iii) sold the working capital of our Aruba operations, including hydrocarbon inventories, to the GOA, CITGO Aruba Refining N.V. (CAR), and CITGO Petroleum Corporation (together with CAR and certain other affiliates, collectively, CITGO). We refer to this transaction as the “Aruba Disposition.” The agreements associated with the Aruba Disposition were finalized in September 2016, including approval of such agreements by the Aruba Parliament. We no longer own any assets or have any operations in Aruba. In June 2016, we recognized an asset impairment loss of $56 million representing all of the remaining carrying value of our long-lived assets in Aruba. These assets were primarily related to our crude oil and refined products terminal and transshipment facility in Aruba (collectively, the Aruba Terminal), which were included in our refining segment. We recognized the impairment loss at that time because we concluded that it was more likely than not that we would ultimately transfer ownership of these assets to the GOA as a result of agreements entered into in June 2016 between the GOA and CITGO providing for, among other things, the GOA’s lease of those assets to CITGO. (See Note 12 for disclosure related to the method to determine fair value.) We had previously written off all of the carrying value of the long-lived assets of the refining operations (the Aruba Refinery) and recognized an asset retirement obligation upon the suspension of operations of those assets in 2012. Therefore, there was no other significant effect to our results of operations from the Aruba Disposition during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016, except with respect to income taxes, which are discussed below. In addition, the net cash impact to us upon effectiveness of the Aruba Disposition on October 1, 2016, was not significant. In September 2016 and in connection with the Aruba Disposition, our U.S. subsidiaries were unable to collect any outstanding debt obligations owed to them by our Aruba subsidiaries, which resulted in the recognition by us of an income tax benefit in the U.S. of $42 million during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016 . We had no income tax effect in Aruba from the cancellation of debt or other effects of the Aruba Disposition because of net operating loss carryforwards associated with our operations in Aruba against which we had previously recorded a full valuation allowance. 9 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Inventories consisted of the following (in millions): Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market. As of December 31, 2015 , we had a valuation reserve of $766 million in order to state our inventories at market. As of September 30, 2016 , we reevaluated our inventories and determined that our cost was lower than market. As a result, for the nine months ended September 30, 2016 , we recorded a change in our lower of cost or market inventory valuation reserve that resulted in a net benefit to our results of operations of $747 million . The income statement benefit for the nine months ended September 30, 2016 differs from the change in the balance sheet reserve due to the foreign currency effect of inventories held by our international operations. As of September 30, 2016 , the replacement cost (market value) of last-in, first-out (LIFO) inventories exceeded their LIFO carrying amounts by $1.2 billion . As of September 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 , our non-LIFO inventories accounted for $675 million and $668 million , respectively, of our total inventories. Credit Facilities Revolver We have a $3 billion revolving credit facility (the Revolver) that matures in November 2020 . We have the option to increase the aggregate commitments under the Revolver to $4.5 billion , subject to certain conditions. The Revolver also provides for the issuance of letters of credit of up to $2.0 billion . No amounts were outstanding under the Revolver as of September 30, 2016 or December 31, 2015 , and we had no borrowings under the Revolver during the nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 . VLP Revolver VLP has a $750 million senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the VLP Revolver) that matures in November 2020 . The VLP Revolver is available only to the operations of VLP, and creditors of VLP do not have recourse against Valero. VLP has the option to increase the aggregate commitments under the VLP Revolver to $1.0 billion , subject to certain conditions. The VLP Revolver also provides for the issuance of letters of credit of up to $100 million . Outstanding borrowings under the VLP Revolver bear interest at a variable rate, which was 1.8125 percent as of September 30, 2016 . 10 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) During the nine months ended September 30, 2016 , VLP borrowed $139 million and $210 million under the VLP Revolver in connection with VLP’s acquisitions from us of the McKee Terminal Services Business in April 2016 and the Meraux and Three Rivers Terminal Services Business in September 2016 , respectively, and made no repayments under the VLP Revolver. During the nine months ended September 30, 2015 , VLP borrowed $200 million under the VLP Revolver in connection with VLP’s acquisition from us of the Houston and St. Charles Terminal Services Business and repaid $25 million on the VLP Revolver. Borrowings outstanding under the VLP Revolver were $524 million and $175 million as of September 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 , respectively. Canadian Revolver One of our Canadian subsidiaries has a C$50 million committed revolving credit facility (the Canadian Revolver) that matures in November 2016 . No amounts were outstanding under the Canadian Revolver as of September 30, 2016 or December 31, 2015 , and we had no borrowings under the Canadian Revolver during the nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 . Accounts Receivable Sales Facility We have an accounts receivable sales facility with a group of third-party entities and financial institutions to sell eligible trade receivables on a revolving basis. In July 2016, we amended our agreement to decrease the facility from $1.4 billion to $1.3 billion and extended the maturity date to July 2017 . Proceeds from the sale of receivables under this facility are reflected as debt. Under this program, one of our marketing subsidiaries (Valero Marketing) sells eligible receivables, without recourse, to another of our subsidiaries (Valero Capital), whereupon the receivables are no longer owned by Valero Marketing. Valero Capital, in turn, sells an undivided percentage ownership interest in the eligible receivables, without recourse, to the third-party entities and financial institutions. To the extent that Valero Capital retains an ownership interest in the receivables it has purchased from Valero Marketing, such interest is included in our financial statements solely as a result of the consolidation of the financial statements of Valero Capital with those of Valero Energy Corporation; the receivables are not available to satisfy the claims of the creditors of Valero Marketing or Valero Energy Corporation. During the nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 , we had no proceeds from or repayments under the accounts receivable sales facility. 11 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Summary of Credit Facilities We had outstanding borrowings, letters of credit issued, and availability under our revolving credit facilities as follows (in millions): ___________________ Non-Bank Debt During the nine months ended September 30, 2016 , we issued $1.25 billion of 3.4 percent senior notes due September 15, 2026 . Proceeds from this debt issuance totaled $1.246 billion . We also incurred $10 million of debt issuance costs. During the nine months ended September 30, 2016 , we had no repayments under our non-bank debt. In October 2016, we redeemed our 6.125 percent senior notes with a maturity date of June 15, 2017 for $778 million , or 103.70 percent of stated value, and our 7.2 percent senior notes with a maturity date of October 15, 2017 for $213 million , or 106.27 percent of stated value. During the nine months ended September 30, 2015 , we issued $600 million of 3.65 percent senior notes due March 15, 2025 and $650 million of 4.9 percent senior notes due March 15, 2045 . Proceeds from these debt issuances totaled $1.246 billion . We also incurred $12 million of debt issuance costs. In addition, we made scheduled debt repayments of $400 million related to our 4.5 percent senior notes and $75 million related to our 8.75 percent debentures. Other Debt In June 2016, a joint venture in Canada that we consolidate entered into a C$72 million senior secured credit facility. This non-revolving credit facility bears interest at a fixed rate (as defined by the lender) plus the applicable margin and matures in June 2023 . During the nine months ended September 30, 2016 , borrowings under this facility totaled C$72 million and debt repayments totaled C$2 million . As of September 30, 2016 , the effective interest rate of this facility was 3.85 percent. 12 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Capitalized Interest Capitalized interest was $14 million and $18 million for the three months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 , respectively, and $53 million and $50 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Capital Lease Obligations In October 2016, we entered into agreements under which we expect to lease storage tanks located at three of our refineries. The leases will not commence until certain required regulatory permitting occurs. The lease agreements will be accounted for as capital leases and we expect to recognize capital lease assets and related obligations of approximately $490 million . These capital lease agreements have initial terms of 10 years each and each agreement has successive 10 -year automatic renewal terms. Environmental Matters We are involved, together with several other companies, in an environmental cleanup in the Village of Hartford, Illinois (the Village) and during 2015, one of these companies assumed the ongoing remediation in the Village pursuant to a federal court order. We had previously conducted an initial response in the Village, along with other companies, pursuant to an administrative order issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The parties involved in the initial response may have further claims among themselves for costs already incurred. We also continue to be engaged in site assessment and interim measures at the adjacent shutdown refinery site, which we acquired as part of an acquisition in 2005, and we are in litigation with other potentially responsible parties and the Illinois EPA relating to the remediation of the site. In each of these matters, we have various defenses, limitations, and potential rights for contribution from the other responsible parties. We have recorded a liability for our expected contribution obligations. However, because of the unpredictable nature of these cleanups, the methodology for allocation of liabilities, and the State of Illinois’ failure to directly sue third parties responsible for historic contamination at the site, it is reasonably possible that we could incur a loss in a range of $0 to $200 million in excess of the amount of our accrual to ultimately resolve these matters. Factors underlying this estimated range are expected to change from time to time, and actual results may vary significantly from this estimate. Litigation Matters We are party to claims and legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. We have not recorded a loss contingency liability with respect to some of these matters because we have determined that it is remote that a loss has been incurred. For other matters, we have recorded a loss contingency liability where we have determined that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and that the loss is reasonably estimable. These loss contingency liabilities are not material to our financial position. We re-evaluate and update our loss contingency liabilities as matters progress over time, and we believe that any changes to the recorded liabilities will not be material to our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. 13 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Reconciliation of Balances The following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of equity attributable to our stockholders, equity attributable to noncontrolling interests, and total equity (in millions): ___________________________ 14 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Share Activity Activity in the number of shares of common stock and treasury stock was as follows (in millions): Treasury Stock We purchase shares of our common stock as authorized under our common stock purchase program and to meet our obligations under employee stock-based compensation plans. On September 21, 2016 , our board of directors authorized our purchase of up to an additional $2.5 billion of our outstanding common stock with no expiration date. Common Stock Dividends On November 2, 2016 , our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.60 per common share payable on December 15, 2016 to holders of record at the close of business on November 22, 2016 . Income Tax Effects Related to Components of Other Comprehensive Loss The tax effects allocated to each component of other comprehensive loss were as follows (in millions): 15 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss by component, net of tax, were as follows (in millions): 16 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The components of net periodic benefit cost related to our defined benefit plans were as follows (in millions): We contributed $132 million and $114 million , respectively, to our pension plans and $12 million and $11 million , respectively, to our other postretirement benefit plans during the nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 . Of the $132 million contributed to our pension plans during the nine months ended September 30, 2016 , $100 million was discretionary and was contributed during the third quarter of 2016. As a result of the discretionary pension contributions discussed above, our expected contributions to our pension plans have increased to $136 million for 2016. Our anticipated contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans during 2016 have not changed from the amount previously disclosed in our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2015. 17 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Earnings per common share were computed as follows (dollars and shares in millions, except per share amounts): 18 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Participating securities include restricted stock and performance awards granted under our 2011 Omnibus Stock Incentive Plan. 19 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) In the normal course of business, we have financial interests in certain entities that have been determined to be VIEs. We consolidate a VIE when we have a variable interest in an entity for which we are the primary beneficiary such that we have (a) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (b) the obligation to absorb losses of or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. In order to make this determination, we evaluated our contractual arrangements with the VIEs, including arrangements for the use of assets, purchases of products and services, debt, equity, or management of operating activities. The following discussion summarizes our involvement with our VIEs: VLP was determined to be a VIE because the public limited partners of VLP ( i.e. , parties other than entities under common control with the general partner) lack the power to direct the activities of VLP that most significantly impact its economic performance because they do not have substantive kick-out rights over the general partner or substantive participating rights in VLP. Furthermore, we determined that we are the primary beneficiary of VLP because (a) we are the single decision maker and because our general partner interest provides us with the sole power to direct the activities that most significantly impact VLP’s economic performance and (b) our 66.6 percent limited partner interest and 2 percent general partner interest provide us with significant economic rights and obligations. All of VLP’s revenues are derived from us; therefore, there is limited risk to us associated with VLP’s operations. In the event of certain conditions, the debt agreement provides us (as lender) with certain power to direct the activities that most significantly impact DGD’s economic performance. Because the loan agreement conveys such power to us and is separate from our ownership rights, DGD was determined to be a VIE. For this reason and because we hold a 50 percent ownership interest that provides us with significant economic rights and obligations, we determined that we are the primary beneficiary 20 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) of DGD. DGD has risk associated with its operations because it generates revenues from third-party customers. The VIEs’ assets can only be used to settle their own obligations and the VIEs’ creditors have no recourse to our assets. We do not provide financial guarantees to our VIEs. Although we have provided credit facilities to the VIEs in support of their construction or acquisition activities, these transactions are eliminated in consolidation. Our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows are impacted by our consolidated VIEs’ performance, net of intercompany eliminations, to the extent of our ownership interest in each VIE. The following tables present summarized balance sheet information for the significant assets and liabilities of our VIEs, which are included in our balance sheets (in millions). 21 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) 22 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The following table reflects activity related to our reportable segments (in millions): 23 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Total assets by reportable segment were as follows (in millions): In order to determine net cash provided by operating activities, net income is adjusted by, among other things, changes in current assets and current liabilities as follows (in millions): The above changes in current assets and current liabilities differ from changes between amounts reflected in the applicable balance sheets for the respective periods for the following reasons: 24 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) There were no significant noncash investing activities for the nine months ended September 30, 2016 . Noncash financing activities for the nine months ended September 30, 2016 included: Noncash investing and financing activities for the nine months ended September 30, 2015 included the recognition of a capital lease asset and related obligation associated with an agreement for storage tanks near one of our refineries. Noncash financing activities for the nine months ended September 30, 2015 also included an accrual of $30 million for the purchase of 506,100 shares of our common stock, which was settled in early October 2015. Cash flows reflected as “other financing activities, net” for the nine months ended September 30, 2016 included the payment of a long-term liability of $137 million owed to a joint venture partner associated with an owner-method joint venture investment. Cash flows related to interest and income taxes were as follows (in millions): 25 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) General U.S. GAAP requires or permits certain assets and liabilities to be measured at fair value on a recurring or nonrecurring basis in our balance sheets, and those assets and liabilities are presented below under “Recurring Fair Value Measurements” and “Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements.” Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis, such as derivative financial instruments, are measured at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis, such as the impairment of property, plant and equipment, are measured at fair value in particular circumstances. U.S. GAAP also requires the disclosure of the fair values of financial instruments when an option to elect fair value accounting has been provided, but such election has not been made. A debt obligation is an example of such a financial instrument. The disclosure of the fair values of financial instruments not recognized at fair value in our balance sheet is presented below under “Other Financial Instruments.” U.S. GAAP provides a framework for measuring fair value and establishes a three-level fair value hierarchy that prioritizes inputs to valuation techniques based on the degree to which objective prices in external active markets are available to measure fair value. Following is a description of each of the levels of the fair value hierarchy. 26 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Recurring Fair Value Measurements The tables below present information (in millions) about our assets and liabilities recognized at their fair values in our balance sheets categorized according to the fair value hierarchy of the inputs utilized by us to determine the fair values as of September 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 . We have elected to offset the fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty, including any related cash collateral assets or obligations as shown below; however, fair value amounts by hierarchy level are presented in the tables below on a gross basis. We have no derivative contracts that are subject to master netting arrangements that are reflected gross on the balance sheet. 27 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) A description of our assets and liabilities recognized at fair value along with the valuation methods and inputs we used to develop their fair value measurements are as follows: 28 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) There were no transfers between levels for assets and liabilities held as of September 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 that were measured at fair value on a recurring basis. There was no activity during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 related to the fair value amounts categorized in Level 3 as of September 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 . Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements As discussed in Note 2 , we concluded that the Aruba Terminal was impaired as of June 30, 2016, which resulted in an asset impairment loss of $56 million that was recorded in June 2016. The fair value of the Aruba Terminal was determined using an income approach and was classified in Level 3. We employed a probability-weighted approach to possible future cash flow scenarios, including transferring ownership of the business to the GOA or continuing to operate. There were no assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of September 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 . 29 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Other Financial Instruments Financial instruments that we recognize in our balance sheets at their carrying amounts are shown in the table below along with their associated fair values (in millions): The methods and significant assumptions used to estimate the fair value of these financial instruments are as follows: 30 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) We are exposed to market risks primarily related to the volatility in the price of commodities, foreign currency exchange rates, and the price of credits needed to comply with various government and regulatory programs. We enter into derivative instruments to manage some of these risks, including derivative instruments related to the various commodities we purchase or produce, and foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts, as described below under “Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk.” These derivative instruments are recorded as either assets or liabilities measured at their fair values (see Note 12 ), as summarized below under “Fair Values of Derivative Instruments,” with changes in fair value recognized currently in income. The effect of these derivative instruments on our income is summarized below under “Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income.” The cash flow effects of all of our derivative instruments are reflected in operating activities in our statements of cash flows for all periods presented. Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk Commodity Price Risk We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including futures, swaps, and options. We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our hedging and trading operations. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. To manage commodity price risk, we use economic hedges, which are not designated as fair value or cash flow hedges, and we use fair value and cash flow hedges from time to time. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes. Our objectives for entering into hedges or trading derivatives are described below. 31 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) As of September 30, 2016 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were used as economic hedges, as well as commodity derivative instruments related to the physical purchase of corn at a fixed price. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels, except those identified as corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels, and soybean oil contracts that are presented in thousands of pounds). 32 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) As of September 30, 2016 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into for trading purposes. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes represent thousands of barrels, except those identified as corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels). We had no commodity derivative contracts outstanding as of September 30, 2016 and 2015 or during the nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 that were designated as fair value or cash flow hedges. Foreign Currency Risk We are exposed to exchange rate fluctuations on transactions entered into by our international operations that are denominated in currencies other than the local (functional) currencies of those operations. To manage our exposure to these exchange rate fluctuations, we use foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts. These contracts are not designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes and therefore are classified as economic hedges. As of September 30, 2016 , we had forward contracts to purchase $328 million of U.S. dollars. These contracts matured on or before October 31, 2016 . Environmental Compliance Program Price Risk We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory environmental compliance programs. To manage this risk, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. Certain of these programs require us to blend biofuels into the products we produce, and we are subject to such programs in most of the countries in which we operate. These countries set annual quotas for the percentage of biofuels that must be blended into the motor fuels consumed in these countries. As a producer of motor fuels from petroleum, we are obligated to blend biofuels into the products we produce at a rate that is at least equal to the applicable quota. To the degree we are unable to blend at the applicable rate, we must purchase biofuel credits (primarily RINs in the U.S.). We are exposed to the volatility in the 33 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) market price of these credits, and we manage that risk by purchasing biofuel credits when prices are deemed favorable. The cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was $198 million and $94 million for the three months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 , respectively, and $532 million and $283 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. These amounts are reflected in cost of sales. Effective January 1, 2015, we became subject to additional requirements under greenhouse gas emission programs, including the cap-and-trade systems, as discussed in Note 12 . Under these cap-and-trade systems, we purchase various greenhouse gas emission credits available on the open market. Therefore, we are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits. The cost to implement certain provisions of the cap-and-trade systems are significant; however, we recovered the majority of these costs from our customers for the nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 and expect to continue to recover the majority of these costs in the future. For the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016 and 2015 , the net cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was immaterial. Fair Values of Derivative Instruments The following tables provide information about the fair values of our derivative instruments as of September 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 (in millions) and the line items in the balance sheets in which the fair values are reflected. See Note 12 for additional information related to the fair values of our derivative instruments. As indicated in Note 12 , we net fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty under master netting arrangements, including cash collateral assets and obligations. The tables below, however, are presented on a gross asset and gross liability basis, which results in the reflection of certain assets in liability accounts and certain liabilities in asset accounts. 34 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Market and Counterparty Risk Our price risk management activities involve the receipt or payment of fixed price commitments into the future. These transactions give rise to market risk, which is the risk that future changes in market conditions may make an instrument less valuable. We closely monitor and manage our exposure to market risk on a daily basis in accordance with policies approved by our board of directors. Market risks are monitored by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy. We do not require any collateral or other security to support derivative instruments into which we enter. We also do not have any derivative instruments that require us to maintain a minimum investment-grade credit rating. Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income The following tables provide information about the gain or loss recognized in income on our derivative instruments and the income statement line items in which such gains and losses are reflected (in millions). 35 Table of Contents CAUTIONARY STATEMENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF SAFE HARBOR PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995 This Form 10-Q, including without limitation our disclosures below under the heading “OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK , ” includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. You can identify our forward-looking statements by the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “expect,” “plan,” “intend,” “estimate,” “project,” “projection,” “predict,” “budget,” “forecast,” “goal,” “guidance,” “target,” “could,” “should,” “may,” and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements include, among other things, statements regarding: We based our forward-looking statements on our current expectations, estimates, and projections about ourselves and our industry. We caution that these statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that we cannot predict. In addition, we based many of these forward-looking statements on assumptions about future events that may prove to be inaccurate. Accordingly, our actual results may differ materially from the future performance that we have expressed or forecast in the forward-looking statements. Differences between actual results and any future performance suggested in these forward-looking statements could result from a variety of factors, including the following: 36 Table of Contents Any one of these factors, or a combination of these factors, could materially affect our future results of operations and whether any forward-looking statements ultimately prove to be accurate. Our forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and actual results and future performance may differ materially from those suggested in any forward-looking statements. We do not intend to update these statements unless we are required by the securities laws to do so. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing. We undertake no obligation to publicly release any revisions to any such forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. This Form 10-Q includes references to financial measures that are not defined under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). These non-GAAP financial measures include adjusted net income attributable to Valero Energy Corporation stockholders, gross margin, and adjusted operating income. We have included these non-GAAP financial measures to help facilitate the comparison of operating results between periods. See the accompanying financial tables in “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for a reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures. In note (c) to the accompanying tables, we disclose the reasons why we believe our use of the non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information. 37 Table of Contents OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK Overview Third Quarter Results In the third quarter of 2016 , we reported net income attributable to Valero Energy Corporation (Valero) stockholders of $613 million compared to $1.4 billion in the third quarter of 2015 , which represents a decrease of $764 million . Excluding a $42 million (a) tax benefit recognized in connection with the transfer of ownership of the Aruba Refinery and the Aruba Terminal to the Government of Aruba (GOA), adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders in the third quarter of 2016 was $571 million , representing a decrease of $806 million from the comparable 2015 period. The decrease in net income and adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders is primarily due to lower operating income in the third quarter of 2016 compared to the third quarter of 2015 (net of the resulting decrease of $513 million in income tax expense between the two periods). Operating income decreased by $1.2 billion , as outlined by segment in the following table (in millions). The $1.2 billion decrease is due primarily to the following: First Nine Months Results For the first nine months of 2016 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders of $1.9 billion compared to $3.7 billion for the first nine months of 2015 , which represents a decrease of $1.8 billion . The results for the first nine months of 2016 , however, are impacted by (i) a noncash benefit of $579 million (b) from a lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment and (ii) a noncash charge of $56 million (a) from an asset impairment loss related to our Aruba Terminal, as well as (iii) a tax benefit of $42 million (a) recognized in connection with the transfer of ownership of the Aruba Refinery and Aruba Terminal to the GOA. Excluding the resulting $565 million net benefit to net income attributable to Valero stockholders, adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders for the first nine months of 2016 was $1.4 billion , which represents a decrease of $2.3 billion from the comparable 2015 period. 38 Table of Contents The decrease in both net income and adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders is due to lower operating income for the first nine months of 2016 compared to the first nine months of 2015 (net of the resulting decrease of $1.1 billion in income tax expense between the two periods). Operating income decreased by $2.8 billion , while adjusted operating income decreased by $3.5 billion , as outlined by segment in the following tables (in millions). The $2.8 billion decrease in operating income was positively impacted by the net effect of the adjustments discussed above for the lower of cost or market inventory valuation benefit and impairment loss. We have excluded such effects from adjusted operating income because we believe that these adjustments are not indicative of our core operating performance and may obscure the underlying business results and trends. The $3.5 billion decrease in adjusted operating income is due primarily to the following: Additional Information and Non-GAAP Reconciliations Additional details and analysis of the changes in the operating income and adjusted operating income of our business segments and other components of net income and adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders, including a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures used in this Overview to their most comparable amounts reported under U.S. GAAP, are provided below under “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” beginning on page 41 . __________________________ 39 Table of Contents Outlook During the third quarter of 2016, margins were fairly stable, but they are trending lower thus far in the fourth quarter. Below is a summary of factors that may impact our results of operations during the fourth quarter of 2016: 40 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following tables highlight our results of operations, our operating performance, and market prices that directly impact our operations. In addition, these tables include financial measures that are not defined under U.S. GAAP and represent non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are reconciled to their most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures and include adjusted net income attributable to Valero Energy Corporation stockholders, adjusted operating income, and gross margin. In note (c) to these tables, we disclose the reasons why we believe our use of non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information. The narrative following these tables provides an analysis of our results of operations. Financial Highlights (millions of dollars, except share and per share amounts) ________________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 41 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) ________________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 42 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 43 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 44 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 45 Table of Contents Ethanol Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) _______________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 46 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 47 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 48 Table of Contents Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) _______________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 49 Table of Contents General Operating revenues decreased $2.9 billion (or 13 percent) and cost of sales decreased $1.6 billion (or 9 percent) in the third quarter of 2016 compared to the third quarter of 2015 primarily due to a decrease in refined product prices and crude oil feedstock costs, respectively. Operating income decreased $1.2 billion in the third quarter of 2016 compared to the third quarter of 2015 , primarily due to a decrease in refining segment operating income of $1.3 billion , partially offset by an increase in ethanol segment operating income of $71 million . The reasons for these changes in the operating results of our segments, as well as other items that affected our income, are discussed below. Refining Refining segment operating income decreased $1.3 billion in the third quarter of 2016 compared to the third quarter of 2015 primarily due to a $1.4 billion decrease in refining gross margin, partially offset by a $31 million decrease in operating expenses and a $14 million decrease in depreciation and amortization expense. Refining gross margin decreased $1.4 billion (a $5.31 per barrel decrease) in the third quarter of 2016 compared to the third quarter of 2015 , due primarily to the following: 50 Table of Contents light sweet crude oils and sour crude oils in the third quarter of 2016 had an unfavorable impact to our refining margin of approximately $180 million. The decrease of $31 million in operating expenses was primarily due to a $20 million decrease in employee-related expenses primarily due to lower incentive compensation expense. The decrease of $14 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to $17 million of write-offs for projects that were cancelled during the third quarter of 2015. Ethanol Ethanol segment operating income increased $71 million in the third quarter of 2016 compared to the third quarter of 2015 primarily due to a $64 million (or $0.19 per gallon) increase in gross margin and a $9 million reduction in operating expenses. The increase in ethanol segment gross margin of $64 million was due primarily to the following: The $9 million decrease in operating expenses was primarily due to a $5 million decrease in chemical costs. Other Income tax expense decreased $513 million from the third quarter of 2015 to the third quarter of 2016 primarily as a result of lower income before income tax expense. The effective tax rates of 18 percent in the third quarter of 2016 and 32 percent in the third quarter of 2015 are lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 35 percent because income from our international operations is taxed at statutory rates that are lower than in the U.S. The effective tax rate in the third quarter of 2016 was also lower than the rate in the third quarter of 2015 due to (i) a benefit of $42 million associated with the transfer of ownership of the Aruba Refinery and Aruba Terminal to the GOA and (ii) a benefit of $35 million resulting from the settlement of an income tax audit. The transfer of ownership of the Aruba Refinery and Aruba Terminal to the GOA is more fully described in Note 2 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 51 Table of Contents Financial Highlights (millions of dollars, except share and per share amounts) ________________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 52 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) ________________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 53 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 54 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 55 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 56 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 57 Table of Contents Ethanol Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) _______________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 58 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 59 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 60 Table of Contents Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) _______________ See note references on pages 62 and 63 . 61 Table of Contents The following notes relate to references on pages 41 through 49 and pages 52 through 61 . In June 2016, we recognized an asset impairment loss of $56 million representing all of the remaining carrying value of the long-lived assets of our crude oil and refined products terminal and transshipment facility in Aruba (collectively, the Aruba Terminal). We recognized the impairment loss at that time because we concluded that it was more likely than not that we would ultimately transfer ownership of these assets to the GOA as a result of agreements entered into in June 2016 between the GOA and CITGO for the GOA’s lease of those assets to CITGO. There was no other significant effect to our results of operations from the Aruba Disposition during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016, except with respect to income taxes, which are discussed below. In addition, the net cash impact to us upon effectiveness of the Aruba Disposition on October 1, 2016, was not significant. In September 2016 and in connection with the Aruba Disposition, our U.S. subsidiaries were unable to collect any outstanding debt obligations owed to them by our Aruba subsidiaries, which resulted in the recognition by us of an income tax benefit in the U.S. of $42 million during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016. We had no income tax effect in Aruba from the cancellation of debt or other effects of the Aruba Disposition because of net operating loss carryforwards associated with our operations in Aruba against which we had previously recorded a full valuation allowance. We have defined these non-GAAP measures and believe they are useful to the external users of our financial statements, including industry analysts, investors, lenders, and rating agencies. We believe these measures are useful to assess our ongoing financial performance because, when reconciled to their most comparable U.S. GAAP measures, they provide improved comparability between periods through the exclusion of certain items that we believe are not indicative of our core operating performance and that may obscure our underlying business results and trends. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered as alternatives to their most comparable U.S. GAAP measures nor should they be considered in isolation or as a substitute for an analysis of our results of operations as reported under U.S. GAAP. In addition, these non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies because we may define them differently, which diminishes the utility of these measures. Non-GAAP measures are as follows: 62 Table of Contents valuation adjustment, its related income tax effect, the asset impairment loss, and the income tax benefit on the Aruba Disposition. Adjusted operating income per barrel represents adjusted operating income (defined in (c) above) for our refining segment or refining regions divided by the respective throughput volumes. Adjusted operating income per gallon represents adjusted operating income (defined in (c) above) for our ethanol segment divided by production volumes. Throughput and production volumes are calculated by multiplying throughput and production volumes per day (as provided in the accompanying tables) by the number of days in the applicable period. General Operating revenues decreased $14.1 billion (or 20 percent) and cost of sales decreased $10.6 billion (or 18 percent) in the first nine months of 2016 compared to the first nine months of 2015 primarily due to a decrease in refined product prices and crude oil feedstock costs, respectively. Operating income decreased $2.8 billion in the first nine months of 2016 compared to the first nine months of 2015 , primarily due to a decrease in refining segment operating income of $2.8 billion , partially offset by an increase in ethanol segment operating income of $59 million . Adjusted operating income decreased $3.5 billion in the first nine months of 2016 compared to the first nine months of 2015 , primarily due to a decrease in refining segment 63 Table of Contents adjusted operating income of $3.5 billion , partially offset by an increase in ethanol segment adjusted operating income of $9 million . The reasons for these changes in the operating results of our segments, as well as other items that affected our income, are discussed below. Refining Refining segment adjusted operating income decreased $3.5 billion in the first nine months of 2016 compared to the first nine months of 2015 primarily due to a $3.5 billion decrease in refining gross margin and a $63 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense, partially offset by a $97 million decrease in operating expenses. Refining gross margin decreased $3.5 billion (a $4.87 per barrel decrease) in the first nine months of 2016 compared to the first nine months of 2015 , due primarily to the following: 64 Table of Contents The decrease of $97 million in operating expenses was primarily due to a $58 million decrease in energy costs driven by lower natural gas prices ( $2.27 per MMBtu in the first nine months of 2016 compared to $2.73 per MMBtu in the first nine months of 2015 ) and a $26 million decrease in employee-related expenses primarily due to lower incentive compensation expense. The increase of $63 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to an increase of $41 million in depreciation expense associated with new capital projects and $30 million in refinery turnaround and catalyst amortization expense resulting from the completion of turnaround projects at several of our refineries. Ethanol Ethanol segment adjusted operating income increased $9 million in the first nine months of 2016 compared to the first nine months of 2015 primarily due to a $39 million decrease in operating expenses, partially offset by a $16 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense and a $14 million (or $0.01 per gallon) decrease in gross margin. The decrease in ethanol segment gross margin of $14 million was due primarily to the following: 65 Table of Contents The $39 million decrease in operating expenses was primarily due to a $22 million decrease in energy costs related to lower natural gas prices ( $2.27 per MMBtu in the first nine months of 2016 compared to $2.73 per MMBtu in the first nine months of 2015 ) and a $13 million decrease in chemical costs. The increase of $16 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to a $10 million gain on the sale of certain plant assets in the first nine months of 2015 that was reflected in depreciation and amortization expense thereby reducing depreciation and amortization expense in that period. Other In June 2016, we evaluated the Aruba Terminal for potential impairment and concluded that it was impaired, resulting in an asset impairment loss of $56 million related to our refining segment. This matter is more fully described in Note 2 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Income tax expense decreased $1.1 billion from the first nine months of 2015 to the first nine months of 2016 primarily as a result of lower income before income tax expense. The effective tax rates of 25 percent in the first nine months of 2016 and 32 percent in the first nine months of 2015 are lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 35 percent because income from our international operations is taxed at statutory rates that are lower than in the U.S. The effective tax rate in the first nine months of 2016 was also lower than the rate in the first nine months of 2015 due to (i) the reversal of the lower of cost or market inventory valuation reserve of $747 million , the majority of which impacted our international operations that are taxed at lower statutory tax rates, (ii) a benefit of $42 million associated with the transfer of ownership of the Aruba Refinery and Aruba Terminal to the GOA, and (iii) a benefit of $35 million resulting from the settlement of an income tax audit. The transfer of ownership of the Aruba Refinery and the Aruba Terminal to the GOA is more fully described in Note 2 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 66 Table of Contents LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Cash Flows for the Nine Months Ended September 30, 2016 Our operations generated $3.8 billion of cash in the first nine months of 2016 , driven primarily by net income of $2.0 billion and excluding $928 million of noncash charges to income, along with a positive change in working capital of $953 million . Noncash charges include $1.4 billion of depreciation and amortization expense, $56 million for the asset impairment loss associated with our Aruba Terminal, and $193 million of deferred income tax expense, partially offset by a benefit of $747 million from a lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment. See “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for further discussion of our operations. The change in our working capital is further detailed in Note 11 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. This source of cash mainly resulted from: The $3.8 billion of cash generated by our operations, along with $1.65 billion in proceeds from the issuance of debt (primarily $1.25 billion of 3.4 percent senior notes due September 15, 2026 and borrowings under the VLP Revolver of $349 million as discussed in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), were used mainly to: Cash Flows for the Nine Months Ended September 30, 2015 Our operations generated $5.1 billion of cash in the first nine months of 2015 , driven primarily by net income of $3.7 billion and excluding $1.4 billion of noncash charges to income. Noncash charges include $1.3 billion of depreciation and amortization expense and $77 million of deferred income tax expense. See “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for further discussion of our operations. The change in our working capital in the first nine months of 2015 had little impact to cash generated by our operations, contributing only $46 million. The change in our working capital is further detailed in Note 11 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. This source of cash mainly resulted from a decrease in receivables, partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable, primarily as a result of decreasing commodity prices. The $5.1 billion of cash generated by our operations in the first nine months of 2015 , along with $1.45 billion in proceeds from the issuance of debt ( $600 million of 3.65 percent senior notes due March 15, 2025 , $650 million of 4.9 percent senior notes due March 15, 2045 , and borrowings under the VLP Revolver of $200 million as discussed in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), were used mainly to: 67 Table of Contents Capital Investments For 2016, we expect to incur approximately $2.4 billion for capital investments, including capital expenditures, deferred turnaround and catalyst costs, and equity-method joint venture investments. This consists of approximately $1.5 billion for stay-in-business capital and $900 million for growth strategies, including our continued investment in Diamond Pipeline LLC (Diamond Pipeline) described below. This capital investment estimate excludes potential strategic acquisitions. We continuously evaluate our capital budget and make changes as conditions warrant. We hold equity-method investments in joint ventures and we invest in these joint ventures or enter into new joint venture arrangements to enhance our operations. In December 2015, we exercised our option to purchase a 50 percent interest in Diamond Pipeline, which was formed by Plains Pipeline, L.P. (Plains) to construct and operate a 440-mile, 20-inch crude oil pipeline expected to provide capacity of up to 200,000 barrels per day of domestic sweet crude oil from the Plains Cushing, Oklahoma terminal to our Memphis Refinery, with the ability to connect into the Capline Pipeline. The pipeline is expected to be completed in 2017 for an estimated $925 million.  We have contributed $136 million in Diamond Pipeline and expect to continue making contributions as the construction progresses. Contractual Obligations As of September 30, 2016 , our contractual obligations included debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, purchase obligations, and other long-term liabilities. There were no material changes outside the ordinary course of business with respect to these contractual obligations during the nine months ended September 30, 2016 . In October 2016, we entered into agreements under which we expect to lease storage tanks located at three of our refineries. The leases will not commence until certain required regulatory permitting occurs. The lease agreements will be accounted for as capital leases and we expect to recognize capital lease assets and related obligations of approximately $490 million . These capital lease agreements have initial terms of 10 years each and each agreement has successive 10 -year automatic renewal terms. Currently, we have an accounts receivable sales facility with a group of third-party entities and financial institutions to sell eligible trade receivables on a revolving basis up to $1.3 billion . As of September 30, 2016 , the actual availability under the facility fell below the facility borrowing capacity to $1.2 billion primarily due to a decrease in eligible trade receivables as a result of the current market price environment for the finished products that we produce. Our debt and financing agreements do not have rating agency triggers that would automatically require us to post additional collateral. However, in the event of certain downgrades of our senior unsecured debt by the ratings agencies, the cost of borrowings under some of our bank credit facilities and other arrangements would increase. All of the ratings on our senior unsecured debt are at or above investment grade level as follows: 68 Table of Contents We cannot provide assurance that these ratings will remain in effect for any given period of time or that one or more of these ratings will not be lowered or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency. We note that these credit ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities and may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating agency. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Any future reduction below investment grade or withdrawal of one or more of our credit ratings could have a material adverse impact on our ability to obtain short- and long-term financing and the cost of such financings. Summary of Credit Facilities As of September 30, 2016 , we had outstanding borrowings and letters of credit issued under our credit facilities as follows (in millions): Letters of credit issued as of September 30, 2016 expire in 2016 through 2018. Other Matters Impacting Liquidity and Capital Resources Stock Purchase Program As of September 30, 2016 , we had approximately $190 million of our common stock remaining to be purchased under our previously authorized $2.5 billion common stock purchase program. On September 21, 2016 , our board of directors authorized our purchase of up to an additional $2.5 billion of our outstanding common stock with no expiration date. We have no obligation to make purchases under the program. Pension Plan Funding We contributed $132 million to our pension plans and $12 million to our other postretirement benefit plans during the nine months ended September 30, 2016 . During the fourth quarter of 2016, we plan to contribute approximately $4 million to our pension plans and $8 million to our other postretirement benefit plans. Environmental Matters Our operations are subject to extensive environmental regulations by governmental authorities relating to the discharge of materials into the environment, waste management, pollution prevention measures, GHG emissions, and characteristics and composition of gasolines and distillates. Because environmental laws and regulations are becoming more complex and stringent and new environmental laws and regulations are continuously being enacted or proposed, the level of future expenditures required for environmental matters could increase in the future as previously discussed above in “OUTLOOK.” In addition, any major upgrades in any of our operating facilities could require material additional expenditures to comply with environmental 69 Table of Contents laws and regulations. See Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of our environmental matters. Tax Matters During the third quarter of 2016, we settled the audit related to our U.S. federal income tax returns for 2008 and 2009. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has ongoing tax audits related to our U.S. federal income tax returns from 2010 through 2014, and we have received Revenue Agent Reports (RARs) in connection with the 2010 and 2011 audit. We are contesting certain tax positions and assertions included in the RARs and continue to make progress in resolving certain of these matters with the IRS. We believe that the ultimate settlement of these audits will not be material to our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. Cash Held by Our International Subsidiaries We operate in countries outside the U.S. through subsidiaries incorporated in these countries, and the earnings of these subsidiaries are taxed by the countries in which they are incorporated. We intend to reinvest these earnings indefinitely in our international operations even though we are not restricted from repatriating such earnings to the U.S. in the form of cash dividends. Should we decide to repatriate such earnings, we would incur and pay taxes on the amounts repatriated. In addition, such repatriation could cause us to record deferred tax expense that could significantly impact our results of operations. We believe, however, that a substantial portion of our international cash can be returned to the U.S. without significant tax consequences through means other than a repatriation of earnings. As of September 30, 2016 , $2.2 billion of our cash and temporary cash investments was held by our international subsidiaries. Concentration of Customers Our operations have a concentration of customers in the refining industry and customers who are refined product wholesalers and retailers. These concentrations of customers may impact our overall exposure to credit risk, either positively or negatively, in that these customers may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other conditions. However, we believe that our portfolio of accounts receivable is sufficiently diversified to the extent necessary to minimize potential credit risk. Historically, we have not had any significant problems collecting our accounts receivable. Sources of Liquidity We believe that we have sufficient funds from operations and, to the extent necessary, from borrowings under our credit facilities, to fund our ongoing operating requirements. We expect that, to the extent necessary, we can raise additional funds from time to time through equity or debt financings in the public and private capital markets or the arrangement of additional credit facilities. However, there can be no assurances regarding the availability of any future financings or additional credit facilities or whether such financings or additional credit facilities can be made available on terms that are acceptable to us. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. As of September 30, 2016 , there were no significant changes to our critical accounting policies since the date our annual report on Form 10‑K for the year ended December 31, 2015 was filed. 70 Table of Contents COMMODITY PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including swaps, futures, and options to manage the volatility of: We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our price risk activities. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes to take advantage of existing market conditions related to future results of operations and cash flows. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. The following sensitivity analysis includes all positions at the end of the reporting period with which we have market risk (in millions): See Note 13 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for notional volumes associated with these derivative contracts as of September 30, 2016 . 71 Table of Contents COMPLIANCE PROGRAM PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of biofuel credits and GHG emission credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. To manage these risks, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. As of September 30, 2016 , there was an immaterial amount of gain or loss in the fair value of derivative instruments that would result from a 10 percent increase or decrease in the underlying price of the contracts. See Note 13 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion about these compliance programs. INTEREST RATE RISK The following table provides information about our debt instruments, the fair values of which are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Principal cash flows and related weighted-average interest rates by expected maturity dates are presented. FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK As of September 30, 2016 , we had commitments to purchase $328 million of U.S. dollars. Our market risk was minimal on these contracts, as all of them matured on or before October 31, 2016 . 72 Table of Contents Item 4. Controls and Procedures Our management has evaluated, with the participation of our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in             Rule 13a-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) as of the end of the period covered by this report, and has concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of September 30, 2016 . There has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during our last fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 73 Table of Contents PART II – OTHER INFORMATION The information below describes new proceedings or material developments in proceedings that we previously reported in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 . Litigation We hereby incorporate by reference into this Item our disclosures made in Part I, Item 1 of this report included in Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under the caption “Litigation Matters.” Environmental Enforcement Matters While it is not possible to predict the outcome of the following environmental proceedings, if any one or more of them were decided against us, we believe that there would be no material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. We are reporting these proceedings to comply with SEC regulations, which require us to disclose certain information about proceedings arising under federal, state, or local provisions regulating the discharge of materials into the environment or protecting the environment if we reasonably believe that such proceedings will result in monetary sanctions of $100,000 or more. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (Benicia Refinery) . In our Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2016, we reported that we had received settlement communications from the EPA regarding various alleged reporting and storage violations at our Benicia Refinery, which we reasonably believe will result in penalties in excess of $100,000. We recently resolved this matter with the EPA. Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) (Benicia Refinery). We currently have multiple outstanding Violation Notices (VNs) issued by the BAAQMD from 2013 to the present. These VNs are for alleged reporting violations and excess emissions at our Benicia Refinery and asphalt plant. In the third quarter of 2016, we entered into an Agreement with the BAAQMD to resolve various outstanding VNs and continue to work with the BAAQMD to resolve the remaining VNs. San Francisco Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) (Benicia Refinery). The RWQCB issued a Notice of Administrative Civil Liability to our Benicia Refinery in October 2016 for alleged violations of the Refinery’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit with a proposed penalty of $197,500. We are working with the RWQCB to resolve this matter. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) (Port Arthur Refinery). In our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, we reported that we had received two proposed Agreed Orders from the TCEQ resolving multiple violations that occurred between May 2007 and April 2013 at our Port Arthur Refinery. In the third quarter of 2016, we finalized both Agreed Orders resolving these matters with the TCEQ. Environment Canada (EC) (Quebec Refinery). We are involved in a legal proceeding initiated by the EC alleging breaches of certain conditions at our Quebec Refinery of a directive issued under the Canadian Fisheries Act. We are working with the EC to resolve the matter, which we reasonably believe will result in penalties in excess of $100,000. 74 Table of Contents Item 1A. Risk Factors We disclose the following risk factor in addition to the risk factors we have disclosed in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 . Compliance with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Renewable Fuel Standard could adversely affect our performance. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has implemented a Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) pursuant to the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007. The RFS program sets annual quotas for the quantity of renewable fuels (such as ethanol) that must be blended into transportation fuels consumed in the United States. A Renewable Identification Number (RIN) is assigned to each gallon of renewable fuel produced in or imported into the United States. As a producer of petroleum-based transportation fuels, we are obligated to blend renewable fuels into the products we produce at a rate that is at least commensurate to the EPA’s quota and, to the extent we do not, we must purchase RINs in the open market to satisfy our obligation under the RFS program. We are exposed to the volatility in the market price of RINs. We cannot predict the future prices of RINs. RINs prices are dependent upon a variety of factors, including EPA regulations, the availability of RINs for purchase, the price at which RINs can be purchased, and levels of transportation fuels produced, all of which can vary significantly from quarter to quarter. If sufficient RINs are unavailable for purchase or if we have to pay a significantly higher price for RINs, or if we are otherwise unable to meet the EPA’s RFS mandates, our results of operations and cash flows could be adversely affected. 75 Table of Contents Item 6. Exhibits ______________ 76 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. Date: November 8, 2016 77