10-Q 1 vloform10-qx9302015.htm 10-Q 10-Q UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q (Mark One) For the Quarterly Period Ended September 30, 2015 OR Commission File Number 1-13175 VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) One Valero Way San Antonio, Texas (Address of principal executive offices) 78249 (Zip Code) (210) 345-2000 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes o No þ The number of shares of the registrant’s only class of common stock, $0.01 par value, outstanding as of October 30, 2015 was 481,503,440 . VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION TABLE OF CONTENTS i Table of Contents PART I – FINANCIAL INFORMATION Item 1. Financial Statements VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS (Millions of Dollars, Except Par Value) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 1 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME (Millions of Dollars, Except Per Share Amounts) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 2 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (Millions of Dollars) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 3 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (Millions of Dollars) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 4 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Basis of Presentation As used in this report, the terms “Valero,” “we,” “us,” or “our” may refer to Valero Energy Corporation, one or more of its consolidated subsidiaries, or all of them taken as a whole. These unaudited financial statements have been prepared in accordance with United States (U.S.) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for interim financial information and with the instructions to Form 10-Q and Article 10 of Regulation S-X of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and notes required by U.S. GAAP for complete financial statements. In the opinion of management, all adjustments considered necessary for a fair presentation have been included. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature unless disclosed otherwise. Financial information for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2015 and 2014 included in these Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements is derived from our unaudited financial statements. Operating results for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2015 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the year ending December 31, 2015. The balance sheet as of December 31, 2014 has been derived from our audited financial statements as of that date. For further information, refer to our financial statements and notes thereto included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 . In May 2014, we abandoned our Aruba Refinery, except for the associated crude oil and refined products terminal assets that we continue to operate. As a result, the refinery’s results of operations have been presented as discontinued operations for the nine months ended September 30, 2014 . For the nine months ended September 30, 2014 , the Aruba Refinery had no operating revenues and a $64 million loss before income tax expense, primarily related to asset retirement obligations. There was no tax benefit recognized for the loss from discontinued operations for the nine months ended September 30, 2014 as we do not expect to realize this tax benefit. Significant Accounting Policies Use of Estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we review our estimates based on currently available information. Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates. Discontinued Operations In April 2014, the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 205, “Presentation of Financial Statements,” and ASC Topic 360, “Property, Plant, and Equipment,” were amended to change the criteria for reporting discontinued operations. The provisions of these amendments modify the definition of discontinued operations by limiting discontinued operations reporting to disposals of components of an entity that represent strategic shifts that have or will have a major effect on an entity’s operations and financial results. These amendments require additional disclosures about discontinued operations and new disclosures for other disposals of individually material components of an organization that do not meet the definition of a discontinued operation. In addition, the guidance allows companies to have significant continuing involvement and continuing cash flows with the discontinued operation. These provisions were effective 5 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) prospectively for annual reporting periods beginning on or after December 15, 2014, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2015 did not affect our financial position or results of operations; however, it may result in changes to the manner in which future dispositions of operations or assets, if any, are presented in our financial statements, or it may require additional disclosures. New Accounting Pronouncements In May 2014, the ASC was amended and a new accounting standard, ASC Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” was issued to clarify the principles for recognizing revenue. The core principle of the new standard is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The standard also requires improved interim and annual disclosures that enable the users of financial statements to better understand the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenues and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. In July 2015, the effective date of the new standard was deferred by one year. As a result, the standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, including interim reporting periods within those reporting periods, and can be adopted either retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented using a practical expedient, as allowed by the standard, or retrospectively with a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the date of initial application. Early adoption is permitted, but not before the original effective date, which was for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, including interim reporting periods within those reporting periods. We are currently evaluating the effect that adopting this standard will have on our financial statements and related disclosures. In February 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 810, “Consolidation,” were amended to improve consolidation guidance for certain types of legal entities. The guidance modifies the evaluation of whether limited partnerships and similar legal entities are variable interest entities (VIEs) or voting interest entities, eliminates the presumption that a general partner should consolidate a limited partnership, affects the consolidation analysis of reporting entities that are involved with VIEs, particularly those that have fee arrangements and related party relationships, and provides a scope exception from consolidation guidance for certain money market funds. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. These provisions may also be adopted retrospectively in previously issued financial statements for one or more years with a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first year restated. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 will not affect our financial position or results of operations, but will result in additional disclosures. In April 2015, the provisions of ASC Subtopic 835-30, “Interest–Imputation of Interest,” were amended to simplify the presentation of debt issuance costs. The guidance requires that debt issuance costs related to a note be reported in the balance sheet as a direct deduction from the face amount of that note, consistent with debt discounts, and that amortization of debt issuance costs be reported as interest expense. In August 2015, these provisions were further amended with guidance from the Securities and Exchange Commission staff that they would not object to an entity deferring and presenting debt issuance costs related to line-of-credit arrangements as an asset and subsequently amortizing the deferred debt issuance costs ratably over the term of the line-of-credit arrangement, regardless of whether there are any outstanding borrowings on the line-of-credit arrangement. These provisions are to be applied retrospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early 6 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) adoption permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 will not materially affect our financial position or results of operations; however, our debt issuance costs associated with issued debt (other than borrowings on our line-of-credit arrangements) will be reported in the balance sheet as a direct deduction from “debt and capital lease obligations, less current portion” and excluded from “deferred charges and other assets, net.” Debt issuance costs associated with borrowings on our line-of-credit arrangements will continue to be reported in the balance sheet as “deferred charges and other assets, net,” and the related amortization will continue to be reported as interest expense. Also in April 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 715, “Compensation–Retirement Benefits,” were amended to provide a practical expedient for the measurement date of an entity’s defined benefit pension or other postretirement plans. For an entity with a fiscal year-end that does not coincide with a month-end, the guidance provides a practical expedient that allows the entity to measure the defined benefit plan assets and obligations using the month-end that is closest to the entity’s fiscal year-end. For an entity that has a significant event in an interim period that calls for a remeasurement, the guidance allows an entity to remeasure the defined benefit plan assets and obligations using the month-end that is closest to the date of the significant event. These provisions are effective retrospectively for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 will not affect our financial position or results of operations. In May 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurements,” were amended to remove the requirement to categorize within the fair value hierarchy all investments for which fair value is measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient. The guidance also removes the requirement to make certain disclosures for all investments that are eligible to be measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient and limits those disclosures to investments for which the entity has elected to measure the fair value using that practical expedient. These provisions are to be applied retrospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 will not affect our financial position or results of operations, but will result in revised disclosures. In July 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 330, “Inventory,” were amended to simplify the measurement of inventory. The guidance does not apply to inventory where the cost of such inventory is measured using the last-in, first-out (LIFO) or the retail inventory methods. The guidance applies to inventory where the cost of such inventory is measured using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) or average cost methods, and it requires the inventory to be measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value rather than the lower of cost or market. Net realizable value is defined as the estimated selling prices in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predicable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. These provisions are to be applied prospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2017 will not affect our financial position or results of operations. In September 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 805, “Business Combinations,” were amended to simplify the accounting and reporting of adjustments made to provisional amounts recognized in a business combination. The amendment requires that an acquirer (i) record, in the same period’s financial statements, the effect on earnings of changes in depreciation, amortization, or other income effects, if any, as a result of the change to the provisional amounts, calculated as if the accounting had been completed at the acquisition 7 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) date and (ii) present separately on the statement of income or disclose in the notes the portion of the amount recorded in current-period earnings by line item that would have been recorded in previous reporting periods if the adjustment to the provisional amounts had been recognized as of the acquisition date. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, and should be applied prospectively to adjustments made to provisional amounts that occur after the effective date. Earlier application is permitted for financial statements that have not yet been issued. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 will not affect our financial position or results of operations; however, it may result in changes to the manner in which adjustments to provisional amounts recognized in a future business combination, if any, are presented in our financial statements. Valero Energy Partners LP (VLP) is a publicly traded master limited partnership that we formed to own, operate, develop, and acquire crude oil and refined petroleum products pipelines, terminals, and other transportation and logistics assets. As of September 30, 2015 , VLP’s assets included crude oil and refined products pipeline and terminal systems in the U.S. Gulf Coast and U.S. Mid-Continent regions that are integral to the operations of seven of our refineries. Effective March 1, 2015 , we contributed to VLP our Houston and St. Charles Terminal Services Business, which owns and operates crude oil, intermediates, and refined products terminals supporting our Houston and St. Charles Refineries. We received (i) cash consideration of $571 million and (ii) 1,908,100 common units representing limited partner interests in VLP and 38,941 general partner units representing general partner interests in VLP having an aggregate value of $100 million . A portion of the cash consideration was funded through a $200 million borrowing by VLP under its revolving credit facility. The remaining cash consideration was funded with $211 million of VLP’s cash on hand and a $160 million borrowing under a subordinated credit agreement between VLP and us, which is eliminated in consolidation as further described below. The ownership of VLP consisted of the following: We consolidate the financial statements of VLP into our financial statements and as such, VLP’s cash and temporary cash investments are included in our consolidated cash and temporary cash investments. However, VLP’s cash and temporary cash investments can only be used to settle its own obligations. VLP’s cash and temporary cash investments were $51 million and $237 million as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , respectively. In addition, VLP’s partnership capital attributable to the public’s ownership interest in VLP of $385 million and $375 million as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , respectively, is reflected in noncontrolling interests. 8 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) We have agreements with VLP that establish fees for certain general and administrative services, and operational and maintenance services provided by us. In addition, we have a master transportation services agreement and a master terminal services agreement with VLP under which VLP provides commercial pipeline transportation and terminaling services to us. These transactions are eliminated in consolidation. Effective October 1, 2015 , we contributed to VLP our Corpus Christi Terminal Services Business, which owns and operates crude oil, intermediates, and refined products terminals supporting our Corpus Christi East and West Refineries. We received (i) cash consideration of $395 million and (ii) 1,570,513 common units representing limited partner interests in VLP and 32,051 general partner units representing general partner interests in VLP having an aggregate value of $70 million . The cash consideration was funded with a $395 million borrowing under a subordinated credit agreement between VLP and us. Because we consolidate the financial statements of VLP into our financial statements, this transaction will be eliminated in consolidation and will not impact our consolidated financial position or cash flows. Inventories consisted of the following (in millions): As of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , the replacement cost (market value) of LIFO inventories exceeded their LIFO carrying amounts by $1.0 billion and $857 million , respectively. As of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , our non-LIFO inventories accounted for $634 million and $906 million , respectively, of our total inventories. Credit Facilities Revolver We have a $3 billion revolving credit facility (the Revolver) that matures in November 2018 . We have the option to increase the aggregate commitments under the Revolver to $4.5 billion , subject to, among other things, the consent of the existing lenders whose commitments will be increased or any additional lenders providing such additional capacity. The Revolver has certain restrictive covenants, including a maximum debt-to-capitalization ratio of 60 percent. As of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , we were in compliance with the Revolver’s restrictive covenants. As of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , there were no borrowings outstanding under the Revolver. 9 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) VLP Revolver VLP has a $300 million senior unsecured revolving credit facility agreement (the VLP Revolver) that matures in December 2018 . The VLP Revolver bears interest at a variable rate, which was 1.5 percent as of September 30, 2015 . The VLP Revolver is available only to the operations of VLP, and creditors of VLP do not have recourse against Valero. During the nine months ended September 30, 2015 , VLP borrowed $200 million under the VLP Revolver in connection with VLP’s acquisition of the Houston and St. Charles Terminal Services Business, as further discussed in Note 2 , and repaid $25 million on the VLP Revolver. As of September 30, 2015 , VLP had $175 million of borrowings outstanding under the VLP Revolver. No borrowings were outstanding on the VLP Revolver as of December 31, 2014 . Canadian Revolver One of our Canadian subsidiaries has a C$50 million committed revolving credit facility (the Canadian Revolver) that matures in November 2015 . As of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , there were no borrowings outstanding under the Canadian Revolver. Letters of Credit Letters of credit issued under our committed credit facilities were as follows (in millions): In June 2015, one of our committed letter of credit facilities with a borrowing capacity of $300 million expired and was not renewed. The remaining committed letter of credit facility was amended in July 2015 to extend the maturity date to June 2016 and  reduce the borrowing capacity from $250 million to $125 million . As of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , there were $93 million and $80 million , respectively, of letters of credit issued under our uncommitted short-term bank credit facilities. Non-Bank Debt During the nine months ended September 30, 2015 , we issued $600 million of 3.65 percent senior notes due March 15, 2025 and $650 million of 4.9 percent senior notes due March 15, 2045 . Proceeds from these debt issuances totaled $1.246 billion . We also incurred $12 million of debt issuance costs. In addition, during the nine months ended September 30, 2015 , we made scheduled debt repayments of $400 million related to our 4.5 percent senior notes and $75 million related to our 8.75 percent debentures. During the nine months ended September 30, 2014 , we made a scheduled debt repayment of $200 million related to our 4.75 percent senior notes. 10 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Accounts Receivable Sales Facility We have an accounts receivable sales facility with a group of third-party entities and financial institutions to sell eligible trade receivables on a revolving basis. In July 2015, we amended our agreement to decrease the facility from $1.5 billion to $1.4 billion and extended the maturity date to July 2016 . Proceeds from the sale of receivables under this facility are reflected as debt. Under this program, one of our marketing subsidiaries (Valero Marketing) sells eligible receivables, without recourse, to another of our subsidiaries (Valero Capital), whereupon the receivables are no longer owned by Valero Marketing. Valero Capital, in turn, sells an undivided percentage ownership interest in the eligible receivables, without recourse, to the third-party entities and financial institutions. To the extent that Valero Capital retains an ownership interest in the receivables it has purchased from Valero Marketing, such interest is included in our financial statements solely as a result of the consolidation of the financial statements of Valero Capital with those of Valero Energy Corporation; the receivables are not available to satisfy the claims of the creditors of Valero Marketing or Valero Energy Corporation. As of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 , we had $100 million outstanding under our accounts receivable sales facility. Capitalized Interest Capitalized interest was $18 million and $17 million for the three months ended September 30, 2015 and 2014 , respectively, and $50 million and $52 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2015 and 2014 , respectively. Environmental Matters We are involved, together with several other companies, in an environmental cleanup in the Village of Hartford, Illinois (the Village) and recently, one of these companies assumed the ongoing remediation in the Village pursuant to a federal court order. Along with other companies, we previously conducted initial mitigation and cleanup in the Village pursuant to an administrative order issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The parties involved in the initial Village cleanup may have further claims between themselves for costs already incurred. We also continue to be engaged in site assessment and interim measures at the adjacent shutdown refinery site, which we acquired as part of an acquisition in 2005, and we are in litigation with the Illinois EPA and other potentially responsible parties relating to the remediation of the site. In each of these matters, we have various defenses and rights for contribution from the other responsible parties. We have recorded a liability for our own expected contribution obligations. However, because of the unpredictable nature of these cleanups, the methodology for allocation of liabilities and the state of Illinois’ failure to directly sue third parties responsible for historic contamination at the site, it is reasonably possible that we could incur a loss in a range of $0 to $200 million in excess of the amount of our accrual to ultimately resolve these matters. Factors underlying this estimated range are expected to change from time to time, and actual results may vary significantly from this estimate. Litigation Matters We are party to claims and legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. We have not recorded a loss contingency liability with respect to some of these matters because we have determined that it is remote that a loss has been incurred. For other matters, we have recorded a loss contingency liability where we have 11 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) determined that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and that the loss is reasonably estimable. These loss contingency liabilities are not material to our financial position. We re-evaluate and update our loss contingency liabilities as matters progress over time, and we believe that any changes to the recorded liabilities will not be material to our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. Reconciliation of Balances The following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of equity attributable to our stockholders, equity attributable to noncontrolling interests, and total equity (in millions): The noncontrolling interests relate to third-party ownership interests in VLP and joint venture companies whose financial statements we consolidate due to our controlling interests. 12 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Share Activity Activity in the number of shares of common stock and treasury stock was as follows (in millions): Treasury Stock On July 13, 2015 , our board of directors authorized our repurchase of an additional $2.5 billion of our outstanding common stock with no expiration date. Common Stock Dividends On October 28, 2015 , our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $ 0.50 per common share payable on December 17, 2015 to holders of record at the close of business on November 23, 2015 . Income Tax Effects Related to Components of Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) The tax effects allocated to each component of other comprehensive income (loss) were as follows (in millions): 13 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) Changes in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) by component, net of tax, were as follows (in millions): 14 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The components of net periodic benefit cost related to our defined benefit plans were as follows (in millions): We contributed $114 million and $31 million , respectively, to our pension plans and $11 million and $14 million , respectively, to our other postretirement benefit plans during the nine months ended September 30, 2015 and 2014 . Of the $114 million contributed to our pension plans during the nine months ended September 30, 2015 , $77 million was discretionary and was contributed during the third quarter of 2015. As a result of the additional discretionary pension contributions discussed above, our expected contributions to our pension plans have increased to $124 million for 2015. Our anticipated contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans during 2015 have not changed from the amount previously disclosed in our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2014 . 15 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Earnings per common share were computed as follows (dollars and shares in millions, except per share amounts): 16 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) 17 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The following table reflects activity related to our reportable segments (in millions): Total assets by reportable segment were as follows (in millions): 18 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) In order to determine net cash provided by operating activities, net income is adjusted by, among other things, changes in current assets and current liabilities as follows (in millions): The above changes in current assets and current liabilities differ from changes between amounts reflected in the applicable balance sheets for the respective periods for the following reasons: Noncash investing and financing activities for the nine months ended September 30, 2015 included the recognition of a capital lease asset and related obligation associated with an agreement for storage tanks near one of our refineries. Noncash financing activities for the nine months ended September 30, 2015 also included an accrual of $30 million for the purchase of 506,100 shares of our common stock, which was settled in early October 2015. There were no significant noncash investing activities for the nine months ended September 30, 2014 . Noncash financing activities for the nine months ended September 30, 2014 included an accrual of $70 million for the purchase of 1,500,000 shares of our common stock, which was settled in early October 2014. 19 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Cash flows related to interest and income taxes were as follows (in millions): Cash flows related to the discontinued operations of the Aruba Refinery were immaterial for the nine months ended September 30, 2014 . General U.S. GAAP requires or permits certain assets and liabilities to be measured at fair value on a recurring or nonrecurring basis in our balance sheets, and those assets and liabilities are presented below under “Recurring Fair Value Measurements” and “Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements.” Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis, such as derivative financial instruments, are measured at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis, such as the impairment of property, plant and equipment, are measured at fair value in particular circumstances. U.S. GAAP also requires the disclosure of the fair values of financial instruments when an option to elect fair value accounting has been provided, but such election has not been made. A debt obligation is an example of such a financial instrument. The disclosure of the fair values of financial instruments not recognized at fair value in our balance sheet is presented below under “Other Financial Instruments.” U.S. GAAP provides a framework for measuring fair value and establishes a three-level fair value hierarchy that prioritizes inputs to valuation techniques based on the degree to which objective prices in external active markets are available to measure fair value. Following is a description of each of the levels of the fair value hierarchy. 20 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Recurring Fair Value Measurements The tables below present information (in millions) about our assets and liabilities recognized at their fair values in our balance sheets categorized according to the fair value hierarchy of the inputs utilized by us to determine the fair values as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 . We have elected to offset the fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty, including any related cash collateral assets or obligations as shown below; however, fair value amounts by hierarchy level are presented in the tables below on a gross basis. We have no derivative contracts that are subject to master netting arrangements that are reflected gross on the balance sheet. 21 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) A description of our assets and liabilities recognized at fair value along with the valuation methods and inputs we used to develop their fair value measurements are as follows: 22 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) contracts are valued based on quoted prices from the exchange and are categorized in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. There were no transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 for assets and liabilities held as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 that were measured at fair value on a recurring basis. There was no activity during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2015 and 2014 related to the fair value amounts categorized in Level 3 as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 . Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements There were no assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 . 23 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Other Financial Instruments Financial instruments that we recognize in our balance sheets at their carrying amounts are shown in the table below along with their associated fair values (in millions): The methods and significant assumptions used to estimate the fair value of these financial instruments are as follows: 24 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of commodities, interest rates, and foreign currency exchange rates. We enter into derivative instruments to manage some of these risks, including derivative instruments related to the various commodities we purchase or produce, interest rate swaps, and foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts, as described below under “Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk.” These derivative instruments are recorded as either assets or liabilities measured at their fair values (see Note 11 ), as summarized below under “Fair Values of Derivative Instruments.” In addition, the effect of these derivative instruments on our income is summarized below under “Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income and Other Comprehensive Income.” When we enter into a derivative instrument, it is designated as a fair value hedge, a cash flow hedge, an economic hedge, or a trading derivative. The gain or loss on a derivative instrument designated and qualifying as a fair value hedge, as well as the offsetting loss or gain on the hedged item attributable to the hedged risk, is recognized currently in income in the same period. The effective portion of the gain or loss on a derivative instrument designated and qualifying as a cash flow hedge is initially reported as a component of other comprehensive income and is then recorded into income in the period or periods during which the hedged forecasted transaction affects income. The ineffective portion of the gain or loss on the cash flow derivative instrument, if any, is recognized in income as incurred. For our economic hedges (derivative instruments not designated as fair value or cash flow hedges) and for derivative instruments entered into by us for trading purposes, the derivative instrument is recorded at fair value and changes in the fair value of the derivative instrument are recognized currently in income. The cash flow effects of all of our derivative instruments are reflected in operating activities in our statements of cash flows for all periods presented. We are also exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. To manage this risk, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk Commodity Price Risk We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including futures, swaps, and options. We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our hedging and trading operations. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. For risk management purposes, we use fair value hedges, cash flow hedges, and economic hedges. In addition to the use of derivative instruments to manage commodity price risk, we also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes. Our objective for entering into each type of hedge or trading derivative is described below. 25 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) 26 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) As of September 30, 2015 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were used as economic hedges, as well as commodity derivative instruments related to the physical purchase of corn at a fixed price. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels, except those identified as corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels and soybean oil contracts that are presented in thousands of pounds). 27 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) As of September 30, 2015 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into for trading purposes. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes represent thousands of barrels, except those identified as natural gas contracts that are presented in billions of British thermal units). Interest Rate Risk Our primary market risk exposure for changes in interest rates relates to our debt obligations. We manage our exposure to changing interest rates through the use of a combination of fixed-rate and floating-rate debt. Foreign Currency Risk We are exposed to exchange rate fluctuations on transactions entered into by our international operations that are denominated in currencies other than the local (functional) currencies of those operations. To manage our exposure to these exchange rate fluctuations, we use foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts. These contracts are not designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes, and therefore they are classified as economic hedges. As of September 30, 2015 , we had commitments to purchase $344 million of U.S. dollars. These commitments matured before October 31, 2015 . 28 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Environmental Compliance Program Price Risk We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory environmental compliance programs. Certain of these programs require us to blend biofuels into the products we produce, and we are subject to such programs in most of the countries in which we operate. These countries set annual quotas for the percentage of biofuels that must be blended into the motor fuels consumed in these countries. As a producer of motor fuels from petroleum, we are obligated to blend biofuels into the products we produce at a rate that is at least equal to the applicable quota. To the degree we are unable to blend at the applicable rate, we must purchase biofuel credits (primarily RINs in the U.S.). We are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits, and we manage that risk by purchasing biofuel credits when prices are deemed favorable. The cost of meeting our obligations under these biofuel programs was $95 million and $82 million for the three months ended September 30, 2015 and 2014 , respectively, and $283 million and $265 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2015 and 2014 , respectively. These amounts are reflected in cost of sales. Effective January 1, 2015, we became subject to additional requirements under greenhouse gas emission programs, including the cap-and-trade systems, as discussed in Note 11 . Under these cap-and-trade systems, we purchase various greenhouse gas emission credits available on the open market. Therefore, we are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits. The cost to implement certain provisions of the cap-and-trade systems are significant; however, we have recovered the majority of these costs from our customers for the nine months ended September 30, 2015 and expect to continue to recover the majority of these costs in the future. For the three and nine months ended September 30, 2015 and 2014 , the net cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was immaterial. 29 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Fair Values of Derivative Instruments The following tables provide information about the fair values of our derivative instruments as of September 30, 2015 and December 31, 2014 (in millions) and the line items in the balance sheets in which the fair values are reflected. See Note 11 for additional information related to the fair values of our derivative instruments. As indicated in Note 11 , we net fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty under master netting arrangements, including cash collateral assets and obligations. The tables below, however, are presented on a gross asset and gross liability basis, which results in the reflection of certain assets in liability accounts and certain liabilities in asset accounts. Market and Counterparty Risk Our price risk management activities involve the receipt or payment of fixed price commitments into the future. These transactions give rise to market risk, which is the risk that future changes in market conditions may make an instrument less valuable. We closely monitor and manage our exposure to market risk on a daily basis in accordance with policies approved by our board of directors. Market risks are monitored by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy. We do not require any 30 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) collateral or other security to support derivative instruments into which we enter. We also do not have any derivative instruments that require us to maintain a minimum investment-grade credit rating. Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income and Other Comprehensive Income The following tables provide information about the gain or loss recognized in income and other comprehensive income (OCI) on our derivative instruments and the line items in the financial statements in which such gains and losses are reflected (in millions). For fair value hedges, no component of the derivative instruments’ gains or losses was excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2015 and 2014 . There were no amounts recognized in income for hedged firm commitments that no longer qualified as fair value hedges during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2015 and 2014 . For cash flow hedges, no component of the derivative instruments’ gains or losses was excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2014 . For the three and nine months ended September 30, 2015 , there were no cumulative after-tax gains or losses on cash flow hedges remaining in accumulated other comprehensive income. For the three and nine months ended 31 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) September 30, 2015 and 2014 , there were no amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income into income as a result of the discontinuance of cash flow hedge accounting. 32 Table of Contents CAUTIONARY STATEMENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF SAFE HARBOR PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995 This Form 10-Q, including without limitation our discussion below under the heading “OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK , ” includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. You can identify our forward-looking statements by the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “expect,” “plan,” “intend,” “estimate,” “project,” “projection,” “predict,” “budget,” “forecast,” “goal,” “guidance,” “target,” “could,” “should,” “may,” and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements include, among other things, statements regarding: We based our forward-looking statements on our current expectations, estimates, and projections about ourselves and our industry. We caution that these statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that we cannot predict. In addition, we based many of these forward-looking statements on assumptions about future events that may prove to be inaccurate. Accordingly, our actual results may differ materially from the future performance that we have expressed or forecast in the forward-looking statements. Differences between actual results and any future performance suggested in these forward-looking statements could result from a variety of factors, including the following: 33 Table of Contents Any one of these factors, or a combination of these factors, could materially affect our future results of operations and whether any forward-looking statements ultimately prove to be accurate. Our forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and actual results and future performance may differ materially from those suggested in any forward-looking statements. We do not intend to update these statements unless we are required by the securities laws to do so. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing. We undertake no obligation to publicly release any revisions to any such forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. 34 Table of Contents OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK Overview For the third quarter of 2015 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders from continuing operations of $1.4 billion , or $2.79 per share (assuming dilution), compared to $1.1 billion , or $2.00 per share (assuming dilution), for the third quarter of 2014 . The increase of $318 million was due primarily to the increase of $469 million in our operating income as shown in the table below (in millions). The $631 million increase in refining segment operating income in the third quarter of 2015 compared to the third quarter of 2014 was due primarily to higher margins on gasoline and other refined products ( e.g. , petroleum coke, propane, and sulfur), partially offset by lower discounts on light sweet and sour crude oils relative to Brent crude oil. Our ethanol segment operating income decreased $163 million in the third quarter of 2015 compared to the third quarter of 2014 due primarily to lower ethanol margins that resulted from lower ethanol prices. For the first nine months of 2015 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders from continuing operations of $3.7 billion , or $7.30 per share (assuming dilution), compared to $2.5 billion , or $4.76 per share (assuming dilution) for the first nine months of 2014 . The increase of $1.2 billion was due primarily to the increase of $1.6 billion in our operating income as shown in the table below (in millions). The $2.1 billion increase in refining segment operating income in the first nine months of 2015 compared to the first nine months of 2014 was due to higher margins on gasoline and other refined products ( e.g. , petroleum coke, propane, and sulfur), partially offset by lower discounts for most light sweet and sour crude oils relative to Brent crude oil. Our ethanol segment operating income decreased $473 million in the first nine months 2015 compared to the first nine months of 2014 due to lower ethanol margins that resulted from lower ethanol and lower co-product prices. Corn feedstock costs also declined in the first nine months of 2015 compared to the first nine months of 2014 , but the decline was not as significant as the decline in ethanol prices, which resulted in lower ethanol margins. 35 Table of Contents Additional details and analysis of the changes in the operating income of our business segments and other components of net income attributable to Valero stockholders are provided below under “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.” In March 2015, we issued $600 million of 3.65 percent senior notes due March 15, 2025 and $650 million of 4.9 percent senior notes due March 15, 2045 , and our consolidated subsidiary, Valero Energy Partners LP (VLP), borrowed $200 million under its revolving credit facility (the VLP Revolver), as further described in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. On July 1, 2015 , VLP repaid $25 million of the amount borrowed under the VLP Revolver. On July 13, 2015, our board of directors authorized us to purchase an additional $2.5 billion of our outstanding common stock, with no expiration date to such authorization. Outlook Energy markets and margins were volatile during the first nine months of 2015, and we expect them to continue to be volatile in the near to mid-term. Below is a summary of factors that have impacted or may impact our results of operations during the fourth quarter of 2015: 36 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following tables highlight our results of operations, our operating performance, and market prices that directly impact our operations. The narrative following these tables provides an analysis of our results of operations. Financial Highlights (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) 37 Table of Contents Refining Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 41 . 38 Table of Contents Refining Operating Highlights by Region (c) (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 41 . 39 Table of Contents Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) 40 Table of Contents Ethanol Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) _______________ See note references below. The following notes relate to references on pages 38 through 41 . General Operating revenues decreased $11.8 billion (or 34 percent ) and cost of sales decreased $12.3 billion (or 40 percent) in the third quarter of 2015 compared to the third quarter of 2014 primarily due to a decrease in refined product prices and crude oil feedstock costs, respectively. Despite the decrease in operating revenues, cost of sales decreased to a greater extent resulting in an increase in operating income of $469 million in the third quarter of 2015 compared to the third quarter of 2014 , with refining segment operating income increasing by $631 million and ethanol segment operating income decreasing by $163 million . The reasons for these changes in the operating results of our segments, as well as other items that affected our income, are discussed below. Refining Refining segment operating income increased $631 million from $1.7 billion in the third quarter of 2014 to $2.3 billion in the third quarter of 2015 , due primarily to a $679 million increase in refining margin, partially offset by a $49 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense. 41 Table of Contents Refining margin increased $679 million (a $2.57 per barrel increase) for the third quarter of 2015 compared to the third quarter of 2014 , due primarily to the following: 42 Table of Contents produces hydrogen that is used in our hydrotreater and hydrocracker processing units to produce refined products. Although natural gas costs declined from the third quarter of 2014 to the third quarter of 2015, the decline was not as significant as the decline in the cost of Brent crude oil; therefore, the benefit we normally derive by using natural gas as a feedstock declined. We estimate that the decline in the benefit derived from processing natural gas feedstock had an unfavorable impact to our refining margin of approximately $200 million from the third quarter of 2014 to the third quarter of 2015 . The increase of $49 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to an increase of $20 million in depreciation expense associated with new capital projects, $17 million of write-offs for projects that were cancelled during the period, and $10 million in refinery turnaround and catalyst amortization expense resulting from the completion of turnaround projects at many of our refineries. Ethanol Ethanol segment operating income was $35 million in the third quarter of 2015 compared to $198 million in the third quarter of 2014 . The $163 million decrease in operating income was due primarily to a $162 million decrease in gross margin (a $0.53 per gallon decrease). Ethanol segment gross margin per gallon decreased to $0.47 per gallon in the third quarter of 2015 from $1.00 per gallon in the third quarter of 2014 due primarily to the following: Other “Interest and debt expense, net of capitalized interest” for the third quarter of 2015 increased $14 million from the third quarter of 2014 . This increase was primarily due to the impact from $1.25 billion of debt 43 Table of Contents issued by Valero in March 2015 and $175 million of net borrowings outstanding ( $200 million borrowed in March 2015, net of $25 million repaid in July 2015) under the VLP Revolver. Income tax expense increased $136 million from the third quarter of 2014 to the third quarter of 2015 as a result of higher income from continuing operations before income tax expense. Financial Highlights (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) 44 Table of Contents Refining Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 48 . 45 Table of Contents Refining Operating Highlights by Region (c) (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 48 . 46 Table of Contents Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) 47 Table of Contents Ethanol Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) _______________ See note references below. The following notes relate to references on pages 45 through 48 . General Operating revenues decreased $34.0 billion (or 33 percent) and cost of sales decreased $35.6 billion (or 38 percent) in the first nine months of 2015 compared to the first nine months of 2014 primarily due to a decrease in refined product prices and crude oil feedstock costs, respectively. Despite the decrease in operating revenues, cost of sales decreased to a greater extent resulting in an increase in operating income of $1.6 billion in the first nine months of 2015 compared to the first nine months of 2014 , with refining segment operating income increasing by $2.1 billion and ethanol segment operating income decreasing by $473 million . The reasons for these changes in the operating results of our segments, as well as other items that affected our income, are discussed below. Refining Refining segment operating income increased $2.1 billion from $4.0 billion in the first nine months of 2014 to $6.1 billion in the first nine months of 2015 , due to a $2.1 billion increase in refining margin and a $41 million decrease in operating expenses, partially offset by an $86 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense. 48 Table of Contents Refining margin increased $2.1 billion (a $2.66 per barrel increase) in the first nine months of 2015 compared to the first nine months of 2014 , due primarily to the following: 49 Table of Contents 2015 compared to $3.12 per barrel for the first nine months of 2014 , representing an unfavorable decrease of $0.69 per barrel. Another example is Maya crude oil (a type of sour crude oil) that sold at a discount of $9.24 per barrel to Brent crude oil during the first nine months of 2015 compared to a discount of $14.95 per barrel during the first nine months of 2014 , representing an unfavorable decrease of $5.71 per barrel. We estimate that the narrowing of the discounts for light sweet crude oils and sour crude oils that we processed during the first nine months of 2015 had an unfavorable impact to our refining margin of approximately $75 million and $710 million, respectively. The decrease of $41 million in operating expenses was primarily due to a $158 million decrease in energy costs related to lower natural gas prices ( $2.73 per MMBtu for the first nine months of 2015 compared to $4.58 per MMBtu for the first nine months of 2014 ). This decrease in energy costs was partially offset by the effect of $41 million of favorable sales and ad valorem tax settlements in the first nine months of 2014 , combined with a $41 million increase in employee-related expenses primarily due to higher employee benefit costs and incentive compensation expense and a $26 million increase in costs associated with higher levels of maintenance activities and chemical costs during the first nine months of 2015 . The increase of $86 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily associated with the impact of new capital projects that began operating subsequent to the first nine months of 2014 and $19 million of write-offs for projects that were cancelled during the period. Ethanol Ethanol segment operating income was $155 million for the first nine months of 2015 compared to $628 million for the first nine months of 2014 . The $473 million decrease in operating income was due to a $491 million decrease in gross margin (a $0.62 per gallon decrease), partially offset by a $14 million decrease in operating expenses and a $4 million decrease in depreciation and amortization expense. Ethanol segment gross margin per gallon decreased to $0.51 per gallon for the first nine months of 2015 from $1.13 per gallon for the first nine months of 2014 due primarily to the following: 50 Table of Contents nine months of 2015 compared to $4.30 per bushel in the first nine months of 2014 . We estimate that the decrease in the price of corn that we processed during the first nine months of 2015 had a favorable impact to our ethanol margin of approximately $170 million. The $14 million decrease in operating expenses was primarily due to a $40 million decrease in energy costs primarily related to lower natural gas prices ( $2.73 per MMBtu for the first nine months of 2015 compared to $4.58 per MMBtu for the first nine months of 2014 ), partially offset by an increase of $20 million related to maintenance and chemical costs due to increased production volumes. Other “Interest and debt expense, net of capitalized interest” for the first nine months of 2015 increased $30 million from the first nine months of 2014 . This increase was primarily due to the impact from $1.25 billion of debt issued by Valero and $200 million borrowed by VLP under the VLP Revolver during March 2015, of which VLP repaid $25 million in July 2015. Income tax expense increased $422 million from the first nine months of 2014 to the first nine months of 2015 as a result of higher income from continuing operations before income tax expense, partially offset by a $31 million increase in tax benefits from our U.S. manufacturing deduction, and a $12 million favorable impact related to tax audit settlements. The loss from discontinued operations for the nine months ended September 30, 2014 includes expenses of $64 million primarily related to an asset retirement obligation associated with our decision in May 2014 to abandon the Aruba Refinery, as further described in Note 1 to Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Cash Flows for the Nine Months Ended September 30, 2015 Our operations generated $5.1 billion of cash during the first nine months of 2015 , consisting primarily of net income of $3.7 billion for the period and excluding $1.3 billion of noncash charges to income (primarily depreciation and amortization expense). See “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for further discussion of our operations. The change in working capital over the nine-month period had little impact to cash generated by our operations, contributing only $46 million . This overall change, however, was composed primarily of a decrease in accounts receivable of $1.1 billion and a largely offsetting decrease in accounts payable of $1.0 billion as shown in Note 10 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The favorable 51 Table of Contents effect in accounts receivable and the unfavorable effect in accounts payable were mainly due to a decrease in commodity prices from December 2014 to September 2015. The $5.1 billion of cash provided by our operations during the first nine months of 2015 , along with $1.45 billion in proceeds from the issuance of debt, consisting of $600 million of 3.65 percent senior notes due March 15, 2025 and $650 million of 4.9 percent senior notes due March 15, 2045 , and borrowings under the VLP Revolver of $200 million as discussed in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, were used mainly to: Cash Flows for the Nine Months Ended September 30, 2014 Our operations generated $3.2 billion of cash during the first nine months of 2014 , consisting primarily of net income of $2.5 billion for the period and excluding $1.3 billion of noncash charges to income (primarily depreciation and amortization expense). See “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for further discussion of our operations. However, the change in our working capital over the nine-month period had a negative impact to cash generated by our operations of $808 million . This use of cash was composed primarily of an increase in inventories of $1.2 billion and a decrease in income taxes payable of $133 million , partially offset by a decrease in accounts receivable of $503 million as shown in Note 10 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The unfavorable effect in inventories was mainly due to the purchase of crude oil feedstocks. The unfavorable effect associated with income taxes payable resulted from income tax payments exceeding income tax liabilities incurred in the 2014 period due to the payment of liabilities associated with prior period earnings. The decrease in accounts receivable was primarily attributable to lower sales in September 2014 compared to those in December 2013. The $3.2 billion of cash provided by our operations during the first nine months of 2014 , along with $101 million from available cash on hand, was used mainly to: Capital Investments For 2015, we expect to incur approximately $1.8 billion for capital expenditures and approximately $700 million for deferred turnaround and catalyst costs. The capital expenditure estimate excludes expenditures related to potential strategic acquisitions, as well as the potential investment in the joint venture described below. We continuously evaluate our capital budget and make changes as conditions warrant. We hold an option until January 2016 to purchase a 50 percent interest in the Diamond Pipeline project, a 440-mile, 20-inch crude oil pipeline that is projected to provide capacity of up to 200,000 barrels per day of domestic sweet crude oil from the Plains Cushing, Oklahoma terminal to our Memphis Refinery. The Diamond Pipeline project is currently being developed by a third party for an estimated $900 million and is expected to be completed in 2017. If we decide to exercise our option, we would incur additional capital investment expenditures during the fourth quarter of 2015. 52 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations As of September 30, 2015 , our contractual obligations included debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, purchase obligations, and other long-term liabilities. There were no material changes outside the ordinary course of business with respect to these contractual obligations during the nine months ended September 30, 2015 . We have an accounts receivable sales facility with a group of third-party entities and financial institutions to sell eligible trade receivables on a revolving basis. In July 2015, we amended our agreement to decrease the facility from $1.5 billion to $1.4 billion and extended the maturity date to July 2016 . As of September 30, 2015 , the actual availability under the facility fell below the amended facility borrowing capacity to $1.3 billion primarily due to a decrease in eligible trade receivables as a result of the ongoing decline in the market prices of the finished products that we produce. Our debt and financing agreements do not have rating agency triggers that would automatically require us to post additional collateral. However, in the event of certain downgrades of our senior unsecured debt by the ratings agencies, the cost of borrowings under some of our bank credit facilities and other arrangements would increase. All of the ratings on our senior unsecured debt are at or above investment grade level as follows: We cannot provide assurance that these ratings will remain in effect for any given period of time or that one or more of these ratings will not be lowered or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency. We note that these credit ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities and may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating agency. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Any future reduction below investment grade or withdrawal of one or more of our credit ratings could have a material adverse impact on our ability to obtain short- and long-term financing and the cost of such financings. Other Commercial Commitments As of September 30, 2015 , letters of credit issued under our committed credit facilities were as follows (in millions): The letters of credit issued as of September 30, 2015 expire in 2015 through 2018. Other Matters Impacting Liquidity and Capital Resources Stock Purchase Programs On July 13, 2015, our board of directors authorized us to purchase an additional $2.5 billion of our outstanding common stock with no expiration date to such authorization. This authorization was in addition to the remaining amount available under a $3 billion program previously authorized. During the third quarter of 53 Table of Contents 2015, we completed our purchases under the $3 billion program. As of September 30, 2015 , we had approximately $2 billion remaining available under the $2.5 billion program, but we have no obligation to make purchases under this program. Pension Plan Funding We contributed $114 million to our pension plans and $11 million to our other postretirement benefit plans during the nine months ended September 30, 2015 . During the fourth quarter of 2015 , we plan to contribute approximately $10 million to our pension plans and $9 million to our other postretirement benefit plans. Environmental Matters Our operations are subject to extensive environmental regulations by governmental authorities relating to the discharge of materials into the environment, waste management, pollution prevention measures, greenhouse gas emissions, and characteristics and composition of gasolines and distillates. Because environmental laws and regulations are becoming more complex and stringent and new environmental laws and regulations are continuously being enacted or proposed, the level of future expenditures required for environmental matters could increase in the future as previously discussed above in “OUTLOOK.” In addition, any major upgrades in any of our operating facilities could require material additional expenditures to comply with environmental laws and regulations. See Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of our environmental matters. Tax Matters The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has ongoing tax audits related to our U.S. federal tax returns from 2008 through 2011, and we have received Revenue Agent Reports (RARs) in connection with the audits for tax years 2008 and 2009. We are contesting certain tax positions and assertions included in the RARs and continue to make progress in resolving certain of these matters with the IRS. During the nine months ended September 30, 2015 , we settled the audit related to our 2004 and 2005 tax years consistent with the recorded amounts of uncertain tax position liabilities associated with that audit. In addition, we settled our audit for tax years 2006 and 2007 in October 2015 for amounts consistent with the recorded amounts of uncertain tax position liabilities associated with that audit. Cash Held by Our International Subsidiaries We operate in countries outside the U.S. through subsidiaries incorporated in these countries, and the earnings of these subsidiaries are taxed by the countries in which they are incorporated. We intend to reinvest these earnings indefinitely in our international operations even though we are not restricted from repatriating such earnings to the U.S. in the form of cash dividends. Should we decide to repatriate such earnings, we would incur and pay taxes on the amounts repatriated. In addition, such repatriation could cause us to record deferred tax expense that could significantly impact our results of operations. We believe, however, that a substantial portion of our international cash can be returned to the U.S. without significant tax consequences through means other than a repatriation of earnings. As of September 30, 2015 , $1.6 billion of our cash and temporary cash investments was held by our international subsidiaries. Concentration of Customers Our refining and marketing operations have a concentration of customers in the refining industry and customers who are refined product wholesalers and retailers. These concentrations of customers may impact our overall exposure to credit risk, either positively or negatively, in that these customers may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other conditions. However, we believe that our portfolio of accounts receivable is sufficiently diversified to the extent necessary to minimize potential credit risk. Historically, we have not had any significant problems collecting our accounts receivable. 54 Table of Contents Sources of Liquidity We believe that we have sufficient funds from operations and, to the extent necessary, from borrowings under our credit facilities, to fund our ongoing operating requirements. We expect that, to the extent necessary, we can raise additional funds from time to time through equity or debt financings in the public and private capital markets or the arrangement of additional credit facilities. However, there can be no assurances regarding the availability of any future financings or additional credit facilities or whether such financings or additional credit facilities can be made available on terms that are acceptable to us. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. As of September 30, 2015 , there were no significant changes to our critical accounting policies since the date our annual report on Form 10‑K for the year ended December 31, 2014 was filed. COMMODITY PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including swaps, futures, and options to manage the price volatility of: We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our price risk activities. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes to take advantage of existing market conditions related to future results of operations and cash flows. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. 55 Table of Contents The following sensitivity analysis includes all positions at the end of the reporting period with which we have market risk (in millions): See Note 12 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for notional volumes associated with these derivative contracts as of September 30, 2015 . COMPLIANCE PROGRAM PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of biofuel credits and greenhouse gas emission credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. To manage these risks, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. As of September 30, 2015 , there was an immaterial amount of gain or loss in the fair value of derivative instruments that would result from a 10 percent increase or decrease in the underlying price of the contracts. See Note 12 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion about these compliance programs. 56 Table of Contents INTEREST RATE RISK The following table provides information about our debt instruments, excluding unamortized discount (including fair value adjustments) and capital lease obligations (dollars in millions), the fair values of which are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Principal cash flows and related weighted-average interest rates by expected maturity dates are presented. We had no interest rate derivative instruments outstanding as of September 30, 2015 or December 31, 2014 . FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK As of September 30, 2015 , we had commitments to purchase $344 million of U.S. dollars. Our market risk was minimal on these contracts, as all of them matured before October 31, 2015 . Item 4. Controls and Procedures Our management has evaluated, with the participation of our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in             Rule 13a-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) as of the end of the period covered by this report, and has concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of September 30, 2015 . There has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during our last fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 57 Table of Contents PART II – OTHER INFORMATION The information below describes new proceedings or material developments in proceedings that we previously reported in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 . Litigation We hereby incorporate by reference into this Item our disclosures made in Part I, Item 1 of this Report included in Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under the caption “Litigation Matters.” Environmental Enforcement Matters While it is not possible to predict the outcome of the following environmental proceedings, if any one or more of them were decided against us, we believe that there would be no material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. We are reporting these proceedings to comply with SEC regulations, which require us to disclose certain information about proceedings arising under federal, state, or local provisions regulating the discharge of materials into the environment or protecting the environment if we reasonably believe that such proceedings will result in monetary sanctions of $100,000 or more. Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) (Benicia Refinery). We currently have multiple outstanding Violation Notices (VNs) issued by the BAAQMD, which we reasonably believe may result in penalties of $100,000 or more. These VNs are for various alleged air regulation and air permit violations at our Benicia Refinery and asphalt plant. During the third quarter of 2015, we settled various VNs and continue to work with the BAAQMD to resolve the remaining VNs. Item 1A. Risk Factors There have been no material changes from the risk factors disclosed in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 . 58 Table of Contents Item 6. Exhibits 59 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. Date: November 4, 2015 60