10-Q 1 vloform10-qx6302014.htm 10-Q VLO Form 10-Q - 6.30.2014 UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q (Mark One) For the Quarterly Period Ended June 30, 2014 OR Commission File Number 1-13175 VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) One Valero Way San Antonio, Texas (Address of principal executive offices) 78249 (Zip Code) (210) 345-2000 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes R No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes R No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes o No R The number of shares of the registrant’s only class of common stock, $0.01 par value, outstanding as of July 31, 2014 wa s 527,963,334 . VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION TABLE OF CONTENTS i Table of Contents PART I – FINANCIAL INFORMATION Item 1. Financial Statements VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS (Millions of Dollars, Except Par Value) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 1 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME (Millions of Dollars, Except Per Share Amounts) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 2 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (Millions of Dollars) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 3 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (Millions of Dollars) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 4 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Basis of Presentation As used in this report, the terms “Valero,” “we,” “us,” or “our” may refer to Valero Energy Corporation, one or more of its consolidated subsidiaries, or all of them taken as a whole. These unaudited financial statements have been prepared in accordance with United States (U.S.) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for interim financial information and with the instructions to Form 10-Q and Article 10 of Regulation S-X of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and notes required by U.S. GAAP for complete financial statements. In the opinion of management, all adjustments considered necessary for a fair presentation have been included. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature unless disclosed otherwise. Financial information for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 included in these Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements is derived from our unaudited financial statements. Operating results for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the year ending December 31, 2014. The balance sheet as of December 31, 2013 has been derived from our audited financial statements as of that date. For further information, refer to our financial statements and notes thereto included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 . Reclassification As discussed in Note 3 , in May 2014, we abandoned the Aruba Refinery. As a result, the refinery’s results of operations have been presented as discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of income for all periods presented. Significant Accounting Policies Use of Estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we review our estimates based on currently available information. Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates. Income Taxes In July 2013, the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 740, “Income Taxes,” were amended to provide specific guidance on the financial statement presentation of an unrecognized tax benefit when a net operating loss carryforward, a similar tax loss, or a tax credit carryforward exists at the reporting date. The amendment requires entities to present an unrecognized tax benefit as a reduction to the deferred tax asset generated by the net operating loss carryforward, similar tax loss, or tax credit carryforward, if such items are available to be used to offset the unrecognized tax benefit. These provisions are effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2013 and should be applied prospectively to all unrecognized tax benefits that exist at the effective date, with retrospective application permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2014 did not affect our financial position or results of operations, nor did it require any additional disclosures. 5 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) New Accounting Pronouncements In April 2014, the provisions of ASC Topic 205, “Presentation of Financial Statements,” and ASC Topic 360, “Property, Plant, and Equipment,” were amended to change the criteria for reporting discontinued operations. The provisions of these amendments modify the definition of discontinued operations by limiting discontinued operations reporting to disposals of components of an entity that represent strategic shifts that have or will have a major effect on an entity’s operations and financial results. These amendments require additional disclosures about discontinued operations and new disclosures for other disposals of individually material components of an organization that do not meet the definition of a discontinued operation. In addition, the guidance allows companies to have significant continuing involvement and continuing cash flows with the discontinued operation. These provisions are effective prospectively for annual reporting periods beginning on or after December 15, 2014, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2015 will not affect our financial position or results of operations; however, it may result in changes to the manner in which future dispositions of operations or assets, if any, are presented in our financial statements, or it may require additional disclosures. In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board amended the ASC and issued a new accounting standard, Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” to clarify the principles for recognizing revenue. The core principle of the new standard is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The standard also requires improved interim and annual disclosures that enable the users of financial statements to better understand the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenues and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. The new standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, including interim reporting periods within that reporting period, and can be adopted either retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented using a practical expedient as allowed by the new standard or retrospectively with a cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the date of initial application. Early adoption is not permitted. We are currently evaluating the effect that adopting this new standard will have on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures. In July 2013, we formed Valero Energy Partners LP (VLP), a master limited partnership, to own, operate, develop, and acquire crude oil and refined petroleum products pipelines, terminals, and other transportation and logistics assets. On December 16, 2013 , VLP completed its initial public offering (the Offering) of 17,250,000 common units at a price of $23.00 per unit. VLP received $369 million in net proceeds from the sale of the units, after deducting underwriting fees, structuring fees, and other offering costs. As of June 30, 2014 , VLP’s assets included crude oil and refined petroleum products pipeline and terminal systems in the U.S. Gulf Coast and U.S. Mid-Continent regions that are integral to the operations of our Port Arthur, McKee, and Memphis Refineries. As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , we owned a 68.6 percent limited partner interest and a 2 percent general partner interest in VLP, and the public owned a 29.4 percent limited partner interest. VLP’s cash and temporary cash investments were $382 million and $375 million as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , respectively. Valero consolidates the financial statements of VLP into its financial statements and as such, VLP’s cash and temporary cash investments are included in Valero’s consolidated cash and temporary 6 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) cash investments. However, VLP’s cash and temporary cash investments can be used only to settle its obligations. In addition, VLP’s partnership capital attributable to the public’s ownership interest in VLP of $372 million and $370 million as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , respectively, is reflected in noncontrolling interests. We have agreements with VLP that establish fees for certain general and administrative services, and operational and maintenance services provided by us. In addition, we have a master transportation services agreement and a master terminal services agreement with VLP under which VLP provides commercial transportation and terminaling services to us. These transactions are eliminated in consolidation. On July 1, 2014 , we sold our Texas Crude Systems Business to VLP for total cash consideration of $154 million . The Texas Crude Systems Business is engaged in the business of transporting, terminaling, and storing crude oil and refined petroleum products through various pipeline and terminal systems that compose the McKee Crude System, the Three Rivers Crude System, and the Wynnewood Products System. In connection with this transaction, we entered into additional schedules under our existing master transportation services agreement and master terminal services agreement with VLP with respect to each system. Each system’s schedule constitutes a binding agreement between us and VLP for transportation or terminaling services (as applicable). Each schedule has an initial term of 10 years with one five -year renewal term at our option  and contains minimum throughput requirements and inflation escalators. We also amended and restated our omnibus agreement with VLP and amended our services and secondment agreement with the general partner of VLP. Because Valero consolidates the financial statements of VLP into its financial statements, this transaction will be eliminated in consolidation and will not impact Valero’s consolidated financial position or cash flows. As such, Valero’s consolidated cash and temporary cash investments will not change because of this transaction, however VLP’s cash and temporary cash investments will decrease by $154 million . In May 2014, we decided to abandon our Aruba Refinery, except for the associated crude oil and refined products terminal assets that we continue to operate. As a result of our decision, the refinery’s results of operations have been presented in this report as discontinued operations for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 . We had suspended operations of the refinery in 2012 and at that time we wrote off the entire carrying value of the refinery’s idled crude oil processing units and related infrastructure (refining assets) and supplies inventories that supported the refining operations. In addition, we terminated the employees who supported the refining operations and incurred severance costs at that time. Even though we suspended refining operations in 2012, we continued to maintain the refining assets to allow them to be restarted and did not abandon them until our recent decision to no longer pursue options to restart refining operations. The Aruba Refinery resides on land leased from the Government of Aruba (GOA) and our agreements with the GOA require us to dismantle our leasehold improvements under certain conditions. Because of our May 2014 decision to abandon the refining assets, we believe the GOA will require us to dismantle those assets. As a result, we recognized an asset retirement obligation of $59 million , which was charged to expense during the three months ended June 30, 2014 , and is reflected in discontinued operations. We had not recognized an asset retirement obligation previously due to our belief that we would not be required to 7 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) dismantle the assets as long as we intended to operate them. In the second quarter of 2014, we also recognized liabilities of $4 million relating to obligations under certain contracts, including a liability for the remaining lease payments for the land on which the refining assets reside. Of the $63 million of liabilities recorded in connection with our decision to abandon the Aruba Refinery, $30 million is classified as a current liability and is reflected in accrued expenses, and $33 million is classified as a long-term liability and is reflected in other long-term liabilities as of June 30, 2014 . Our agreements with the GOA require us to complete the dismantlement activities within 3 years . Selected results of operations of the Aruba Refinery are shown below (in millions). There was no tax benefit recognized for the loss from discontinued operations for the the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 as we do not expect to realize this tax benefit. On May 1, 2013 , we completed the separation of our retail business by creating an independent public company named CST Brands, Inc. (CST) and distributing 80 percent of the outstanding shares of CST common stock to our stockholders. Each Valero stockholder received one share of CST common stock for every nine shares of Valero common stock held at the close of business on the record date of April 19, 2013. In connection with the separation, we received an aggregate of $1.05 billion in cash, consisting of $550 million from the issuance of short-term debt to a third-party financial institution on April 16, 2013 and $500 million distributed to us by CST on May 1, 2013. The cash distributed to us by CST was borrowed by CST on May 1, 2013 under its senior secured credit facility. Also on May 1, 2013, CST issued $550 million of its senior unsecured bonds to us, and we exchanged those bonds with the third-party financial institution in satisfaction of our short-term debt. Immediately prior to May 1, 2013, subsidiaries of CST held $315 million of cash, and CST retained that cash following the distribution on May 1, 2013. We also incurred $30 million in costs during the three months ended June 30, 2013 to effect the separation, which were included in general and administrative expenses. We also entered into long-term motor fuel supply agreements with CST in the U.S. and Canada. The nature and significance of our agreements to supply motor fuel to CST through 2028 represents a continuation of activities with CST for accounting purposes. As such, the historical results of operations of our retail business have not been reported as discontinued operations in our statements of income. In November 2013, we disposed of our 20 percent retained interest in CST. 8 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Selected historical results of operations of our retail business prior to the separation are disclosed in Note 11 . Subsequent to May 1, 2013 and through June 30, 2013, our share of CST’s results of operations was reflected in “other income, net.” Our share of income taxes incurred directly by CST during this period was reported in the equity in earnings from CST, and as such is not included in income taxes in our statements of income. Inventories consisted of the following (in millions): As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , the replacement cost (market value) of last in, first out (LIFO) inventories exceeded their LIFO carrying amounts by approximately $7.2 billion and $6.9 billion , respectively. As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , our non-LIFO inventories accounted for $914 million and $851 million , respectively, of our total inventories. Credit Facilities Revolver We have a $3 billion revolving credit facility (the Revolver) that has a maturity date of November 2018 . We have the option to increase the aggregate commitments under the Revolver to $4.5 billion , subject to, among other things, the consent of the existing lenders whose commitments will be increased or any additional lenders providing such additional capacity. The Revolver has certain restrictive covenants, including a maximum debt-to-capitalization ratio of 60 percent. As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , our debt-to-capitalization ratios, calculated in accordance with the terms of the Revolver, were 14 percent and 12 percent, respectively. We believe that we will remain in compliance with this covenant. VLP Revolver VLP has a $300 million senior unsecured revolving credit facility agreement (the VLP Revolver) that has a maturity date of December 2018 . The VLP Revolver is available only to the operations of VLP, and creditors of VLP do not have recourse against Valero. Canadian Facility In addition to the Revolver and the VLP Revolver, one of our Canadian subsidiaries has a C$50 million committed revolving credit facility under which it may borrow and obtain letters of credit that has a maturity date of November 2014 . 9 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Activities Under Our Credit Facilities During the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 , we had no borrowings or repayments under the Revolver, the VLP Revolver, or our Canadian revolving credit facility. As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , we had no borrowings outstanding under these credit facilities. We had outstanding letters of credit under our committed lines of credit as follows (in millions): As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , we had $206 million and $189 million , respectively, of letters of credit outstanding under our uncommitted short-term bank credit facilities. Non-Bank Debt During the six months ended June 30, 2014 , we made a scheduled debt repayment of $200 million related to our 4.75% senior notes. During the six months ended June 30, 2013 , we made scheduled debt repayments of $300 million related to our 4.75% senior notes and $180 million related to our 6.7% senior notes. Accounts Receivable Sales Facility We have an accounts receivable sales facility with a group of third-party entities and financial institutions to sell up to $1.5 billion of eligible trade receivables on a revolving basis. In July 2014, we amended this facility to extend the maturity date to July 2015 . Proceeds from the sale of receivables under this facility are reflected as debt. Under this program, one of our marketing subsidiaries (Valero Marketing) sells eligible receivables, without recourse, to another of our subsidiaries (Valero Capital), whereupon the receivables are no longer owned by Valero Marketing. Valero Capital, in turn, sells an undivided percentage ownership interest in the eligible receivables, without recourse, to the third-party entities and financial institutions. To the extent that Valero Capital retains an ownership interest in the receivables it has purchased from Valero Marketing, such interest is included in our financial statements solely as a result of the consolidation of the financial statements of Valero Capital with those of Valero Energy Corporation; the receivables are not available to satisfy the claims of the creditors of Valero Marketing or Valero Energy Corporation. During the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 , we had no proceeds from or repayments under our accounts receivable sales facility. As of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 , we had $100 million outstanding under our accounts receivable sales facility. Capitalized Interest Capitalized interest was $18 million and $45 million for the three months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 , respectively, and $35 million and $85 million for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. 10 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Environmental Matter We are involved, together with several other companies, in an environmental cleanup in the Village of Hartford, Illinois (the Village) and the adjacent shutdown refinery site, which we acquired as part of a prior acquisition. In cooperation with some of the other companies, we have been conducting initial mitigation and cleanup response pursuant to an administrative order issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The U.S. EPA is seeking further cleanup obligations from us and other potentially responsible parties for the Village. In parallel with the Village cleanup, we are also in litigation with the State of Illinois EPA and other potentially responsible parties relating to the remediation of the shutdown refinery site. In each of these matters, we have various defenses and rights for contribution from the other responsible parties. We have accrued for our own expected contribution obligations. However, because of the unpredictable nature of these cleanups and the methodology for allocation of liabilities, it is reasonably possible that we could incur a loss in a range of $0 to $200 million in excess of the amount of our accrual to ultimately resolve these matters. Factors underlying this estimated range are expected to change from time to time, and actual results may vary significantly from this estimate. Litigation Matters We are party to claims and legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. We have not recorded a loss contingency liability with respect to some of these matters because we have determined that it is remote that a loss has been incurred. For other matters, we have recorded a loss contingency liability where we have determined that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and that the loss is reasonably estimable. These loss contingency liabilities are not material to our financial position. We re-evaluate and update our loss contingency liabilities as matters progress over time, and we believe that any changes to the recorded liabilities will not be material to our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. 11 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Reconciliation of Balances The following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of equity attributable to our stockholders, equity attributable to the noncontrolling interests, and total equity (in millions): The noncontrolling interests relate to third-party ownership interests in VLP and joint venture companies whose financial statements we consolidate due to our controlling interests. 12 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Share Activity Activity in the number of shares of common stock and treasury stock was as follows (in millions): Common Stock Dividends On July 29, 2014 , our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $ 0.275 per common share payable on September 17, 2014 to holders of record at the close of business on August 20, 2014 . Income Tax Effects related to Components of Other Comprehensive Income The tax effects allocated to each component of other comprehensive income (loss) were as follows (in millions): 13 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income Changes in accumulated other comprehensive income by component, net of tax, were as follows  (in millions): 14 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) 15 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) The components of net periodic benefit cost related to our defined benefit plans were as follows (in millions) : In February 2013, we announced changes to certain of our U.S. qualified pension plans that cover the majority of our U.S. employees who work in our refining segment and corporate operations. Benefits under our primary pension plan changed from a final average pay formula to a cash balance formula with staged effective dates that commence either on July 1, 2013 or January 1, 2015 depending on the age and service of the affected employees. All final average pay benefits will be frozen as of December 31, 2014, with all future benefits to be earned under the new cash balance formula. These plan amendments resulted in a $328 million decrease to pension liabilities and a related increase to other comprehensive income during the six months ended June 30, 2013. The benefit of this remeasurement will be amortized into income through 2025 . Our anticipated contributions to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans during 2014 have not changed from amounts previously disclosed in our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2013. We contributed $22 million and $22 million , respectively, to our pension plans and $9 million and $8 million , respectively, to our other postretirement benefit plans during the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 . 16 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Earnings per common share were computed as follows (dollars and shares in millions, except per share amounts): 17 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) 18 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) The following table reflects potentially dilutive securities (in millions) that were excluded from the calculation of “earnings per common share from continuing operations – assuming dilution” as the effect of including such securities would have been antidilutive. Stock options were excluded from weighted-average common shares outstanding – assuming dilution because the exercise price of the stock option was greater than the average market price of our common shares during each reporting period. 19 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) In May 2013, we completed the separation of our retail business, CST, and as a result, we no longer operate a retail business or report retail segment operating results. Segment activity related to our retail business prior to the separation is reflected in the retail segment results below. Motor fuel sales to CST, which were eliminated in consolidation prior to the separation, are reported as refining segment operating revenues from external customers after May 1, 2013. The following table reflects activity related to our reportable segments (in millions): 20 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Total assets by reportable segment were as follows (in millions): In March 2014, we purchased an idled corn ethanol plant in Mount Vernon, Indiana for $34 million from a wholly owned subsidiary of Aventine Renewable Energy Holdings, Inc. We expect to resume production during the third quarter of 2014. We will finalize our purchase accounting once a determination of the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is available, pending the completion of independent appraisals and other evaluations. In order to determine net cash provided by operating activities, net income is adjusted by, among other things, changes in current assets and current liabilities as follows (in millions): The above changes in current assets and current liabilities differ from changes between amounts reflected in the applicable balance sheets for the respective periods for the following reasons: 21 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) There were no significant noncash investing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 . Noncash financing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2014 included an accrual of $104 million for the purchase of 2,000,000 shares of our common stock, which was settled in early July 2014. Noncash financing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2013 included the exchange of CST’s senior unsecured bonds with the third-party financial institution in satisfaction of our short-term debt as described in Note 4 . Cash flows related to interest and income taxes were as follows (in millions): Cash flows related to the discontinued operations of the Aruba Refinery were immaterial for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 . 22 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) General U.S. GAAP requires or permits certain assets and liabilities to be measured at fair value on a recurring or nonrecurring basis in our balance sheets, and those assets and liabilities are presented below under “Recurring Fair Value Measurements” and “Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements.” Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis, such as derivative financial instruments, are measured at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis, such as the impairment of property, plant and equipment, are measured at fair value in particular circumstances. U.S. GAAP also requires the disclosure of the fair values of financial instruments when an option to elect fair value accounting has been provided, but such election has not been made. A debt obligation is an example of such a financial instrument. The disclosure of the fair values of financial instruments not recognized at fair value in our balance sheet is presented below under “Other Financial Instruments.” U.S. GAAP provides a framework for measuring fair value and establishes a three-level fair value hierarchy that prioritizes inputs to valuation techniques based on the degree to which objective prices in external active markets are available to measure fair value. Following is a description of each of the levels of the fair value hierarchy. 23 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Recurring Fair Value Measurements The tables below present information (in millions) about our assets and liabilities recognized at their fair values in our balance sheets categorized according to the fair value hierarchy of the inputs utilized by us to determine the fair values as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 . We have elected to offset the fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty, including any related cash collateral assets or obligations as shown below; however, fair value amounts by hierarchy level are presented on a gross basis in the tables below. We have no derivative contracts that are subject to master netting arrangements that are reflected gross on the balance sheet. 24 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) A description of our assets and liabilities recognized at fair value along with the valuation methods and inputs we used to develop their fair value measurements are as follows: 25 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) denominated in currencies other than the local (functional) currencies of those operations. These contracts are valued based on quoted prices from the exchange and are categorized in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. There were no transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 for assets and liabilities held as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 that were measured at fair value on a recurring basis. There was no activity during the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 related to the fair value amounts categorized in Level 3 as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 . Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements There were no assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 . Other Financial Instruments Financial instruments that we recognize in our balance sheets at their carrying amounts are shown in the table below (in millions): The methods and significant assumptions used to estimate the fair value of these financial instruments are as follows: 26 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of commodities, interest rates, and foreign currency exchange rates. We enter into derivative instruments to manage some of these risks, including derivative instruments related to the various commodities we purchase or produce, interest rate swaps, and foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts, as described below under “Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk.” These derivative instruments are recorded as either assets or liabilities measured at their fair values (see Note 13 ), as summarized below under “Fair Values of Derivative Instruments.” In addition, the effect of these derivative instruments on our income is summarized below under “Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income and Other Comprehensive Income.” When we enter into a derivative instrument, it is designated as a fair value hedge, a cash flow hedge, an economic hedge, or a trading derivative. The gain or loss on a derivative instrument designated and qualifying as a fair value hedge, as well as the offsetting loss or gain on the hedged item attributable to the hedged risk, is recognized currently in income in the same period. The effective portion of the gain or loss on a derivative instrument designated and qualifying as a cash flow hedge is initially reported as a component of other comprehensive income and is then recorded into income in the period or periods during which the hedged forecasted transaction affects income. The ineffective portion of the gain or loss on the cash flow derivative instrument, if any, is recognized in income as incurred. For our economic hedges (derivative instruments not designated as fair value or cash flow hedges) and for derivative instruments entered into by us for trading purposes, the derivative instrument is recorded at fair value and changes in the fair value of the derivative instrument are recognized currently in income. The cash flow effects of all of our derivative instruments are reflected in operating activities in our statements of cash flows for all periods presented. We are also exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. To manage this risk, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk Commodity Price Risk We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including futures, swaps, and options. We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our hedging and trading operations. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by a risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. For risk management purposes, we use fair value hedges, cash flow hedges, and economic hedges. In addition to the use of derivative instruments to manage commodity price risk, we also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes. Our objective for entering into each type of hedge or trading derivative is described below. 27 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) As of June 30, 2014 , we had no outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into to hedge crude oil and refined product inventories and no commodity derivative instruments related to the physical purchase of crude oil and refined products at a fixed price. As of June 30, 2014 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into to hedge forecasted purchases of crude oil and sales of refined products. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels). 28 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) As of June 30, 2014 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were used as economic hedges, as well as commodity derivative instruments related to the physical purchase of corn at a fixed price. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels, except those identified as corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels, and soybean oil contracts that are presented in thousands of pounds). 29 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) As of June 30, 2014 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into for trading purposes. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes represent thousands of barrels, except those identified as natural gas contracts that are presented in billions of British thermal units). Interest Rate Risk Our primary market risk exposure for changes in interest rates relates to our debt obligations. We manage our exposure to changing interest rates through the use of a combination of fixed-rate and floating-rate debt. In addition, at times we have used interest rate swap agreements to manage our fixed to floating interest rate position by converting certain fixed-rate debt to floating-rate debt. We had no interest rate derivative instruments outstanding as of June 30, 2014 or December 31, 2013 , or during the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 . Foreign Currency Risk We are exposed to exchange rate fluctuations on transactions entered into by our international operations that are denominated in currencies other than the local (functional) currencies of those operations. To manage our exposure to these exchange rate fluctuations, we use foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts. These contracts are not designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes, and therefore they are classified as economic hedges. As of June 30, 2014 , we had commitments to purchase $692 million of U.S. dollars. The majority of these commitments matured on or before July 31, 2014 , resulting in an immaterial gain in the third quarter of 2014. 30 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Compliance Program Price Risk We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. The most significant programs impacting our operations are those that require us to blend biofuels into the products we produce, and we are subject to such programs in most of the countries in which we operate. These countries set annual quotas for the percentage of biofuels that must be blended into the motor fuels consumed in these countries. As a producer of motor fuels from petroleum, we are obligated to blend biofuels into the products we produce at a rate that is at least equal to the applicable quota. To the degree we are unable to blend at the applicable rate, we must purchase biofuel credits (primarily RINs in the U.S.). We are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits, and we manage that risk by purchasing biofuel credits when prices are deemed favorable. The cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was $91 million and $137 million for the three months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 , respectively, and $183 million and $267 million for the six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. These amounts are reflected in cost of sales. Fair Values of Derivative Instruments The following tables provide information about the fair values of our derivative instruments as of June 30, 2014 and December 31, 2013 (in millions) and the line items in the balance sheets in which the fair values are reflected. See Note 13 for additional information related to the fair values of our derivative instruments. As indicated in Note 13 , we net fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty under master netting arrangements, including cash collateral assets and obligations. The tables below, however, are presented on a gross asset and gross liability basis, which results in the reflection of certain assets in liability accounts and certain liabilities in asset accounts. 31 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Market and Counterparty Risk Our price risk management activities involve the receipt or payment of fixed price commitments into the future. These transactions give rise to market risk, which is the risk that future changes in market conditions may make an instrument less valuable. We closely monitor and manage our exposure to market risk on a daily basis in accordance with policies approved by our board of directors. Market risks are monitored by a risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy. Concentrations of customers in the refining industry may impact our overall exposure to counterparty risk because these customers may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other conditions. In addition, financial services companies are the counterparties in certain of our price risk management activities, and such financial services companies may be adversely affected by periods of uncertainty and illiquidity in the credit and capital markets. There were no material amounts due from counterparties in the refining or financial services industry as of June 30, 2014 or December 31, 2013 . We do not require any collateral or other security to support derivative instruments into which we enter. We also do not have any derivative instruments that require us to maintain a minimum investment-grade credit rating. 32 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income and Other Comprehensive Income The following tables provide information about the gain or loss recognized in income and other comprehensive income on our derivative instruments and the line items in the financial statements in which such gains and losses are reflected (in millions). For fair value hedges, no component of the derivative instruments’ gains or losses was excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 . There were no amounts recognized in income for hedged firm commitments that no longer qualified as fair value hedges during the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 . 33 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued ) For cash flow hedges, no component of the derivative instruments’ gains or losses was excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness for the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 . For the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 , cash flow hedges primarily related to forward purchases of crude oil, with no cumulative after-tax gains or losses on cash flow hedges remaining in accumulated other comprehensive income. For the three and six months ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 , there were no amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income into income as a result of the discontinuance of cash flow hedge accounting. 34 Table of Contents CAUTIONARY STATEMENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF SAFE HARBOR PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995 This Form 10-Q, including without limitation our discussion below under the heading “OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK , ” includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. You can identify our forward-looking statements by the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “expect,” “plan,” “intend,” “estimate,” “project,” “projection,” “predict,” “budget,” “forecast,” “goal,” “guidance,” “target,” “could,” “should,” “may,” and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements include, among other things, statements regarding: We based our forward-looking statements on our current expectations, estimates, and projections about ourselves and our industry. We caution that these statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that we cannot predict. In addition, we based many of these forward-looking statements on assumptions about future events that may prove to be inaccurate. Accordingly, our actual results may differ materially from the future performance that we have expressed or forecast in the forward-looking statements. Differences between actual results and any future performance suggested in these forward-looking statements could result from a variety of factors, including the following: 35 Table of Contents Any one of these factors, or a combination of these factors, could materially affect our future results of operations and whether any forward-looking statements ultimately prove to be accurate. Our forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and actual results and future performance may differ materially from those suggested in any forward-looking statements. We do not intend to update these statements unless we are required by the securities laws to do so. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing. We undertake no obligation to publicly release any revisions to any such forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. 36 Table of Contents OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK Overview For the second quarter of 2014 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders from continuing operations of $651 million , or $1.22 per share (assuming dilution), compared to $463 million , or $0.84 per share (assuming dilution), for the second quarter of 2013 . The increase of $188 million was due primarily to the increase of $280 million in our operating income as outlined by business segment in the table below (in millions). The $161 million increase in refining segment operating income in the second quarter of 2014 compared to the second quarter of 2013 was due primarily to higher refining throughput margin per barrel and higher throughput volumes in most of our regions, partially offset by higher energy costs and higher depreciation expense between the periods. Our ethanol segment operating income increased $92 million in the second quarter of 2014 compared to the second quarter of 2013 due to higher gross margin per gallon. On May 1, 2013, we completed the separation of our retail business, creating an independent public company named CST Brands, Inc. (CST), and as a result, we no longer operate a retail business. Therefore, we did not have any retail segment operating results for the second quarter of 2014 , resulting in the $39 million decrease in retail segment operating income in the second quarter of 2014 compared to the second quarter of 2013 . For the first six months of 2014 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders from continuing operations of $1.5 billion , or $2.77 per share (assuming dilution), compared to $1.1 billion , or $2.02 per share (assuming dilution), for the first six months of 2013 . The increase of $366 million was due primarily to the increase of $573 million in our operating income as outlined by business segment in the table below (in millions). The $232 million increase in refining segment operating income in the first six months of 2014 compared to the first six months of 2013 was due primarily to higher refining throughput margin per barrel and higher throughput volumes in most of our regions, partially offset by higher energy costs and higher depreciation expense between the periods. Our ethanol segment operating income increased $321 million in the first six 37 Table of Contents months of 2014 compared to the first six months of 2013 due to higher gross margin per gallon, partially offset by higher energy costs. As previously discussed, we no longer operate a retail business. Therefore, we did not have any retail segment operating results for the first six months of 2014 , which resulted in the $81 million decrease in retail segment operating income in the first six months of 2014 compared to the first six months of 2013 . In May 2014, we decided to abandon our Aruba Refinery, except for the associated crude oil and refined products terminal assets that we continue to operate, as further described in Note 3 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. As a result, the Aruba Refinery’s results of operations have been presented as discontinued operations for all periods presented under “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.” Additional analysis of the changes in the operating income of our business segments and other components of net income attributable to Valero stockholders is provided below under “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.” Outlook Our refining segment benefits from processing sour crude oils (such as Mars and Maya crude oil) and light sweet crude oils (such as West Texas Intermediate and Louisiana Light Sweet crude oil) due to the favorable discounts between the prices of these types of crude oil and the price of Brent crude oil. Because the market for refined products generally tracks the price of Brent crude oil, which is a benchmark sweet crude oil, we benefit when we process crude oils that are priced at a discount to Brent crude oil. The discounts in the prices of certain light sweet crude oils and sour crude oils compared to the price of Brent crude oil in the second quarter of 2014 widened compared to the second quarter of 2013 , which positively impacted our refining margins. Thus far in the third quarter of 2014, discounts on most crude oils have narrowed compared to the second quarter of 2014 , and we expect these discounts to remain volatile. As the end of the summer driving season approaches, we expect gasoline margins to follow the normal seasonal trend and decline from current levels. Energy markets and margins are volatile, and we expect them to continue to be volatile in the near to mid-term. Thus far in the third quarter of 2014, ethanol margins have widened slightly. However, we expect lower average ethanol margins for the remainder of 2014 as compared to the first six months of 2014 as ethanol production is expected to increase due to the favorable ethanol margin environment. We are exposed to volatility in the market price of biofuel credits (primarily Renewable Identification Numbers (RINs) needed to comply with the U.S. federal Renewable Fuel Standard), which we purchase in the open market to meet our obligation to blend biofuels into the products we produce. During the first six months of 2014 , the market prices of RINs have been lower than the prices we experienced during 2013. We estimate that the cost of meeting our obligation for the full year of 2014 will be between $300 million and $400 million. Because the market price of RINs is volatile and is significantly impacted by biofuel blending rates that are established by the U.S. EPA, it is difficult for us to predict reliably the market price of RINs. 38 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following tables highlight our results of operations, our operating performance, and market prices that directly impact our operations. The narrative following these tables provides an analysis of our results of operations. Financial Highlights (a) (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) ________________ See note references on page 43 . 39 Table of Contents Refining Operating Highlights (a) (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 43 . 40 Table of Contents Refining Operating Highlights by Region (e) (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 43 . 41 Table of Contents Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) _______________ See note references on page 43 . 42 Table of Contents Retail and Ethanol Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) _______________ See note references below. The following notes relate to references on pages 39 through 43 . General Operating revenues increased $880 million (or 3 percent ) in the second quarter of 2014 compared to the second quarter of 2013 primarily as a result of increased revenues from our refining segment due to an increase in both throughput volumes and refined product prices quarter over quarter in most of our regions. 43 Table of Contents Operating income increased $280 million in the second quarter of 2014 compared to the second quarter of 2013 due primarily to a $161 million increase in refining segment operating income, a $92 million increase in ethanol segment operating income, and a $63 million decrease in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $39 million decrease in retail segment operating income. The reasons for these changes in the operating results of our segments and other items that affected our income are discussed below. Refining Refining segment operating income increased $161 million from $918 million in the second quarter of 2013 to $1.1 billion in the second quarter of 2014 , due primarily to a $241 million increase in refining margin partially offset by a $58 million increase in operating expenses and a $22 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense. Refining margin increased $241 million (a $0.58 per barrel increase) for the second quarter of 2014 compared to the second quarter of 2013 due primarily to the following: 44 Table of Contents The increase of $58 million in operating expenses was due primarily to a $46 million increase in energy costs related to higher natural gas prices ( $4.56 per MMBtu for the second quarter of 2014 compared to $4.00 per MMBtu for the second quarter of 2013) combined with higher use of natural gas due to the increase in throughput volumes. The increase of $22 million in depreciation and amortization expense was due primarily to additional depreciation expense associated with the new hydrocracker at our St. Charles Refinery and our joint venture biofuels plant that began operating in July 2013. Ethanol Ethanol segment operating income was $187 million in the second quarter of 2014 compared to $95 million in the second quarter of 2013 . The $92 million increase in operating income was due primarily to a $102 million increase in gross margin (a $0.39 per gallon increase), partially offset by a $9 million increase in operating expenses. Ethanol segment gross margin per gallon increased to $1.04 per gallon in the second quarter of 2014 from $0.65 per gallon in the second quarter of 2013 due primarily to the following: 45 Table of Contents Corporate Expenses and Other General and administrative expenses decreased $63 million from the second quarter of 2013 to the second quarter of 2014 . This decrease was due primarily to $52 million of environmental and legal reserve adjustments and $30 million for transaction costs related to the separation of our retail business on May 1, 2013 that were recorded in the second quarter of 2013 that did not recur. “Interest and debt expense, net of capitalized interest” for the second quarter of 2014 increased $20 million from the second quarter of 2013 . This increase was due primarily to a $27 million decrease in capitalized interest due to completion of several large capital projects in the second quarter of 2013, including the new hydrocracker at our St. Charles Refinery, partially offset by a $6 million favorable impact from the decrease in average borrowings between the quarters. Income tax expense increased $67 million from the second quarter of 2013 to the second quarter of 2014 due to higher income from continuing operations before income tax expense, partially offset by the impact of an increase in our U.S. manufacturing deduction during the second quarter of 2014 and income taxes related to the separation of CST in the second quarter of 2013 that did not recur. “Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes” for the second quarter of 2014 includes expenses of $59 million for an asset retirement obligation and $4 million for certain contractual obligations associated with our decision in May 2014 to abandon the Aruba Refinery, as further described in Note 3 to Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 46 Table of Contents Financial Highlights (a) (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) _______________ See note references on page 51 . 47 Table of Contents Refining Operating Highlights (a) (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 51 . 48 Table of Contents Refining Operating Highlights by Region (e) (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 51 . 49 Table of Contents Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) _______________ See note references on page 51 . 50 Table of Contents Retail and Ethanol Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) _______________ See note references below. The following notes relate to references on pages 47 through 51 . General Operating revenues increased $ 1.1 billion (or 2 percent ) in the first six months of 2014 compared to the first six months of 2013 primarily as a result of an increase in throughput volumes between the two periods related 51 Table of Contents to our refining segment operations. In addition, operating income increased $573 million in the first six months of 2014 compared to the first six months of 2013 due primarily to a $232 million increase in refining segment operating income, a $321 million increase in ethanol segment operating income, and a $79 million decrease in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a $81 million decrease in retail segment operating income. The reasons for these changes in the operating results of our segments and general and administrative expenses, as well as other items that affected our income, are discussed below. Refining Refining segment operating income increased $232 million from $2.1 billion in the first six months of 2013 to $2.4 billion in the first six months of 2014 , due primarily to a $444 million increase in refining margin, partially offset by a $151 million increase in operating expenses and a $61 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense. Refining margin increased $444 million (a $0.44 per barrel increase) in the first six months of 2014 compared to the first six months of 2013 , due primarily to the following: 52 Table of Contents The increase of $151 million in operating expenses was due primarily to a $119 million increase in energy costs related to higher natural gas prices ( $4.90 per MMBtu for the first six months of 2014 compared to $3.72 per MMBtu for the first six months of 2013 ) combined with higher use of natural gas due to the increase in throughput volumes. The increase of $61 million in depreciation and amortization expense was due primarily to additional depreciation expense of $34 million associated with the new hydrocracker at our St. Charles Refinery and our joint venture biofuels plant that began operating in July 2013 and an increase in refinery turnaround and catalyst amortization expense of $12 million resulting from the completion of turnaround projects at our Texas City and Quebec City Refineries. Ethanol Ethanol segment operating income was $430 million for the first six months of 2014 compared to $109 million for the first six months of 2013 . The $321 million increase in operating income was due primarily to a $384 million increase in gross margin (a $0.65 per gallon increase), partially offset by a $61 million increase in operating expenses. Ethanol segment gross margin per gallon increased to $1.20 per gallon for the first six months of 2014 from $0.55 per gallon for the first six months of 2013 due primarily to the following: The $61 million increase in operating expenses during the first six months of 2014 compared to the first six months of 2013 was due primarily to increased energy costs and chemical costs. The increase in energy costs of $40 million was due primarily to the severe winter weather in the U.S. in the first quarter of 2014 that 53 Table of Contents caused a significant increase in regional natural gas prices combined with higher use of natural gas due to the increase in production volumes. The increase in chemical costs of $10 million was due to higher production volumes. Corporate Expenses and Other General and administrative expenses decreased $79 million from the first six months of 2013 to the first six months of 2014 due primarily to $52 million of environmental and legal reserve adjustments and $30 million for transaction costs related to the separation of our retail business on May 1, 2013 that were recorded during the first six months of 2013 that did not recur. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $22 million due to a $20 million loss on the sale of certain corporate property in 2013 that was reflected in depreciation and amortization expense. “Interest and debt expense, net of capitalized interest” for the first six months of 2014 increased $37 million from the first six months of 2013 . This increase was due primarily to a $50 million decrease in capitalized interest due to completion of several large capital projects during the latter part of the first six months of 2014 including the new hydrocracker at our St. Charles Refinery, partially offset by a $12 million favorable impact from a decrease in average borrowings. Income tax expense increased $156 million from the first six months of 2013 to the first six months of 2014 mainly as a result of higher income from continuing operations before income tax expense, partially offset by the impact of an increase in our U.S. manufacturing deduction during the first six months of 2014 and income taxes related to the separation of CST in the first six months of 2013 that did not recur. “Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of income taxes” for the six months ended June 30, 2014 includes expenses of $59 million for an asset retirement obligation and $4 million for certain contractual obligations associated with our decision in May 2014 to abandon the Aruba Refinery, as further described in Note 3 to Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 54 Table of Contents LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Cash Flows for the Six Months Ended June 30, 2014 and 2013 Net cash provided by operating activities for the first six months of 2014 was $1.4 billion compared to $2.8 billion for the first six months of 2013 . The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was due primarily to the impact of an increase in accounts payable in the first six months of 2013 and a decrease in accounts payable in the first six months of 2014 resulting from a difference in the timing of the purchases of and payments for crude oil between the two periods. The changes in cash provided by or used in working capital during the first six months of 2014 and 2013 are shown in Note 12 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The net cash provided by operating activities during the first six months of 2014 , along with $812 million from available cash on hand, was used mainly to: The net cash provided by operating activities during the first six months of 2013 combined with $735 million of net cash received in connection with the separation of our retail business (consisting of $550 million of proceeds on short-term debt, a $500 million cash distribution from CST less $315 million of cash retained by CST) were used mainly to: Capital Investments For 2014 , we expect to incur approximately $3.0 billion for capital investments of which approximately $700 million is for deferred turnaround and catalyst costs. The capital expenditure estimate excludes expenditures related to strategic business acquisitions. We continuously evaluate our capital budget and make changes as conditions warrant. Contractual Obligations As of June 30, 2014 , our contractual obligations included debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, purchase obligations, and other long-term liabilities. There were no material changes outside the ordinary course of business with respect to these contractual obligations during the six months ended June 30, 2014 . As of June 30, 2014 , we had an accounts receivable sales facility with a group of third-party entities and financial institutions to sell eligible trade receivables on a revolving basis up to $1.5 billion . 55 Table of Contents Our debt and financing agreements do not have rating agency triggers that would automatically require us to post additional collateral. However, in the event of certain downgrades of our senior unsecured debt by the ratings agencies, the cost of borrowings under some of our bank credit facilities and other arrangements would increase. All of our ratings on our senior unsecured debt are at or above investment grade level as follows: We cannot provide assurance that these ratings will remain in effect for any given period of time or that one or more of these ratings will not be lowered or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency. We note that these credit ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities and may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating agency. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Any future reduction below investment grade or withdrawal of one or more of our credit ratings could have a material adverse impact on our ability to obtain short- and long-term financing and the cost of such financings. Other Commercial Commitments As of June 30, 2014 , we had outstanding letters of credit under our committed lines of credit as follows (in millions): As of June 30, 2014 , we had no amounts borrowed under our revolving credit facilities. The letters of credit outstanding as of June 30, 2014 expire in 2014 through 2017. Other Matters Impacting Liquidity and Capital Resources Pension Plan Funding We plan to contribute approximately $38 million to our pension plans and $19 million to our postretirement plans during 2014 . Stock Purchase Programs As of June 30, 2014 , we have approval under our $3 billion common stock purchase program to purchase approximately $2.3 billion of our common stock. Environmental Matters Our operations are subject to extensive environmental regulations by governmental authorities relating to the discharge of materials into the environment, waste management, pollution prevention measures, greenhouse gas emissions, and characteristics and composition of gasolines and distillates. Because environmental laws and regulations are becoming more complex and stringent and new environmental laws and regulations are continuously being enacted or proposed, the level of future expenditures required for environmental matters could increase in the future. In addition, any major upgrades in any of our operating 56 Table of Contents facilities could require material additional expenditures to comply with environmental laws and regulations. See Note 7 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of our environmental matters. Tax Matters During the first six months of 2014, we paid approximately $400 million in tax payments that related to 2013 and that were recorded in income taxes payable as of December 31, 2013. In addition, we currently believe the cash we will pay for income taxes for 2014 will exceed amounts that we paid in 2013 and that such amounts may exceed the total income tax expense that will be reflected on our statement of income. This belief is based primarily on a decrease in deductions that we expect to claim on our U.S. federal income tax return for depreciation on our property, plant, and equipment. In prior years, the U.S. federal government enacted certain legislation that provided for the deduction of depreciation on an accelerated basis on newly built equipment as a means of encouraging capital investment by businesses. This legislation, however, generally did not extend beyond 2013. Although we expect the amount of cash required to pay our 2014 income taxes to increase compared to recent years, we believe that we will generate sufficient cash from operations and have sufficient cash on hand to make our tax payments as they become due. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has ongoing tax audits related to our U.S. federal tax returns from 2002 through 2011 and we have received Revenue Agent Reports (RARs) in connection with the audits for tax years 2002 through 2009. We are vigorously contesting certain tax positions and assertions included in the RARs and we have made significant progress in resolving certain of these matters with the IRS. During the six months ended June 30, 2014 , we settled the audit related to the 2004 and 2005 tax years for a group of our subsidiaries consistent with the recorded amount of uncertain tax position liabilities associated with that audit. In addition, we expect to settle our audits for tax years 2002 through 2007 within the next 12 months and we believe they will be settled for amounts that do not exceed the recorded amounts of uncertain tax position liabilities associated with those audits. As a result, we have classified a portion of our uncertain tax position liabilities as a current liability. As of June 30, 2014 , the total amount of uncertain tax position liabilities, including related penalties and interest, was $437 million, with $240 million reflected as a current liability in income taxes payable and $197 million reflected in other long-term liabilities. Total uncertain tax position liabilities did not change significantly during the six months ended June 30, 2014 . Should we ultimately settle for amounts consistent with our estimates, we believe that we will have sufficient cash on hand at that time to make such payments. Cash Held by Our International Subsidiaries We operate in countries outside the U.S. through subsidiaries incorporated in these countries, and the earnings of these subsidiaries are taxed by the countries in which they are incorporated. We intend to reinvest these earnings indefinitely in our international operations even though we are not restricted from repatriating such earnings to the U.S. in the form of cash dividends. Should we decide to repatriate such earnings, we would incur and pay taxes on the amounts repatriated. In addition, such repatriation could cause us to record deferred tax expense that could significantly impact our results of operations. We believe, however, that a substantial portion of our international cash can be returned to the U.S. without significant tax consequences through means other than a repatriation of earnings. As of June 30, 2014 , $856 million of our cash and temporary cash investments was held by our international subsidiaries. Concentration of Customers Our refining and marketing operations have a concentration of customers in the refining industry and customers who are refined product wholesalers and retailers. These concentrations of customers may impact our overall exposure to credit risk, either positively or negatively, in that these customers may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other conditions. However, we believe that our portfolio of accounts 57 Table of Contents receivable is sufficiently diversified to the extent necessary to minimize potential credit risk. Historically, we have not had any significant problems collecting our accounts receivable. Sources of Liquidity We believe that we have sufficient funds from operations and, to the extent necessary, from borrowings under our credit facilities, to fund our ongoing operating requirements. We expect that, to the extent necessary, we can raise additional funds from time to time through equity or debt financings in the public and private capital markets or the arrangement of additional credit facilities. However, there can be no assurances regarding the availability of any future financings or additional credit facilities or whether such financings or additional credit facilities can be made available on terms that are acceptable to us. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. As of June 30, 2014 , there were no significant changes to our critical accounting policies since the date our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 was filed. COMMODITY PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including swaps, futures, and options to hedge: We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our hedging and trading operations. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes to take advantage of existing market conditions related to future results of operations and cash flows. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by a risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. 58 Table of Contents The following sensitivity analysis includes all positions at the end of the reporting period with which we have market risk (in millions): See Note 14 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for notional volumes associated with these derivative contracts as of June 30, 2014 . COMPLIANCE PROGRAM PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of biofuel credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. To manage this risk, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. As of June 30, 2014 , there was no gain or loss in the fair value of derivative instruments that would result from a 10 percent increase or decrease in the underlying price of the contracts.  See Note 14 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion about these compliance programs. 59 Table of Contents INTEREST RATE RISK The following table provides information about our debt instruments, excluding capital lease obligations (dollars in millions), the fair values of which are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Principal cash flows and related weighted-average interest rates by expected maturity dates are presented. We had no interest rate derivative instruments outstanding as of June 30, 2014 or December 31, 2013 . FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK As of June 30, 2014 , we had commitments to purchase $692 million of U.S. dollars. Our market risk was minimal on these contracts, as the majority of them matured on or before July 31, 2014 , resulting in an immaterial gain in the third quarter of 2014. Item 4. Controls and Procedures Our management has evaluated, with the participation of our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in             Rule 13a-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) as of the end of the period covered by this report, and has concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of June 30, 2014 . There has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during our last fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 60 Table of Contents PART II – OTHER INFORMATION The information below describes new proceedings or material developments in proceedings that we previously reported in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 . Litigation We hereby incorporate by reference into this Item our disclosures made in Part I, Item 1 of this Report included in Note 7 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under the caption “Litigation Matters.” Environmental Enforcement Matters While it is not possible to predict the outcome of the following environmental proceedings, if any one or more of them were decided against us, we believe that there would be no material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. We are reporting these proceedings to comply with SEC regulations, which require us to disclose certain information about proceedings arising under federal, state, or local provisions regulating the discharge of materials in the environment or protecting the environment if we reasonably believe that such proceedings will result in monetary sanctions of $100,000 or more. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) (Port Arthur Refinery).  In the first quarter of 2014, we reported that our Port Arthur Refinery had received an NOE for unauthorized emissions, for which we had not yet received a proposed penalty amount, but reasonably believed it could result in penalties of $100,000 or more.  In the second quarter of 2014, we entered into an Agreed Order with the TCEQ settling the matter. Item 1A. Risk Factors There have been no material changes from the risk factors disclosed in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013 . 61 Table of Contents Item 6. Exhibits 62 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. Date: August 7, 2014 63