10-Q 1 vloform10-qx9302017.htm 10-Q Document UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q (Mark One) For the quarterly period ended September 30, 2017 OR Commission File Number 1-13175 VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) One Valero Way San Antonio, Texas (Address of principal executive offices) 78249 (Zip Code) (210) 345-2000 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes o No þ The number of shares of the registrant’s only class of common stock, $0.01 par value, outstanding as of October 31, 2017 was 437,581,357 . VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION TABLE OF CONTENTS i Table of Contents PART I – FINANCIAL INFORMATION ITEM 1. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS (millions of dollars, except par value) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 1 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) (unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 2 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (millions of dollars) (unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 3 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (millions of dollars) (unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 4 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Basis of Presentation General As used in this report, the terms “Valero,” “we,” “us,” or “our” may refer to Valero Energy Corporation, one or more of its consolidated subsidiaries, or all of them taken as a whole. These unaudited financial statements have been prepared in accordance with United States (U.S.) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for interim financial information and with the instructions to Form 10-Q and Article 10 of Regulation S-X of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and notes required by U.S. GAAP for complete financial statements. In the opinion of management, all adjustments considered necessary for a fair presentation have been included. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature unless disclosed otherwise. Operating results for the nine months ended September 30, 2017 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the year ending December 31, 2017. The balance sheet as of December 31, 2016 has been derived from our audited financial statements as of that date. For further information, refer to our financial statements and notes thereto included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 . Reclassifications Effective January 1, 2017, we revised our reportable segments to reflect a new reportable segment — VLP. The results of the VLP segment include the results of Valero Energy Partners LP (VLP), our majority-owned master limited partnership. Our prior period segment information has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect our current segment presentation. See Note 10 for additional information. Certain amounts reported for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016 have been reclassified to conform to the 2017 presentation. The changes were primarily due to the separate presentation of depreciation and amortization expense related to operating expenses and general and administrative expenses. Significant Accounting Policies Use of Estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we review our estimates based on currently available information. Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates. Accounting Pronouncements Adopted During the Period In July 2015, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2015-11, “Inventory (Topic 330),” to simplify the measurement of inventory measured using the first-in, first-out or average cost methods. The provisions of this ASU require the inventory to be measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value rather than the lower of cost or market. Net realizable value is defined as the estimated selling prices in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. The provisions of this ASU are to be applied prospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. Our adoption of this ASU effective January 1, 5 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) 2017 did not affect our financial position or results of operations since the majority of our inventory is stated at last-in, first-out (LIFO). In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-16, “Income Taxes (Topic 740),” to improve the accounting for the income tax consequences of intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory. The provisions of this ASU require an entity to recognize the income tax consequences of intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory immediately when the transfer occurs. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The provisions should be applied on a modified retrospective basis with a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings as of the beginning of the period of adoption to recognize the income tax consequences of intra-entity transfers of assets that occurred before the adoption date. Our early adoption of this ASU using the modified retrospective method effective January 1, 2017 did not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. Adoption of this guidance more accurately reflects the economics of an intra-entity asset transfer when it occurs by eliminating the previous exception that prohibited the recognition of the income tax consequences of an intra-entity asset transfer until the asset had been sold to an outside party. In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-17, “Consolidation (Topic 810),” to provide guidance on how a reporting entity that is a single decision maker of a variable interest entity (VIE) should treat indirect interests in the entity held through related parties that are under common control with the reporting entity when determining whether it is the primary beneficiary. The provisions of this ASU are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The provisions should be applied on a retrospective basis to all relevant prior periods beginning with the fiscal year in which the VIE guidance was adopted with a cumulative-effect adjustment directly to retained earnings as of the beginning of the period of adoption. Our adoption of this ASU effective January 1, 2017 did not affect our financial position or results of operations. In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-01, “Business Combinations (Topic 805),” to assist entities with evaluating whether transactions should be accounted for as acquisitions (or disposals) of assets or businesses. The provisions of this ASU provide a more robust framework to use in determining when a set of assets and activities is a business by clarifying the requirements related to inputs, processes, and outputs. These provisions are to be applied prospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, with early adoption permitted. Our early adoption of this ASU effective January 1, 2017 did not affect our financial position or results of operations. However, more of our future acquisitions may be accounted for as asset acquisitions. Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606),” to clarify the principles for recognizing revenue. This new standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, including interim reporting periods within those annual periods. We have completed our evaluation of the provisions of this standard and concluded that our adoption will not change the amount or timing of revenues recognized by us, nor will it affect our financial position. The majority of our revenues are generated from the sale of refined petroleum products and ethanol. These revenues are largely based on the current spot (market) prices of the products sold, which represent consideration specifically allocable to the products being sold on a given day, and we recognize those revenues 6 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) upon delivery and transfer of title to the products to our customers. The time at which delivery and transfer of title occurs is the point when our control of the products is transferred to our customers and when our performance obligation to our customers is fulfilled. We will adopt this new standard effective January 1, 2018, and we will use the modified retrospective method of adoption as permitted by the standard. Under that method, the cumulative effect of initially applying the standard is recognized as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings, and revenues reported in the periods prior to the date of adoption are not changed. We do not, however, expect to make such an adjustment to retained earnings. We are currently developing our revenue disclosures and enhancing our accounting systems to enable the preparation of such disclosures as well as the implementation of our internal controls. In January 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-01, “Financial Instruments—Overall (Subtopic 825-10),” to enhance the reporting model for financial instruments regarding certain aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation, and disclosure. The provisions of this ASU are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods. This ASU is to be applied using a cumulative-effect adjustment to the balance sheet as of the beginning of the fiscal year of adoption. The adoption of this ASU effective January 1, 2018 will not affect our financial position or results of operations, but will result in revised disclosures. In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842),” to increase the transparency and comparability among organizations by recognizing lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet and disclosing key information about leasing arrangements. This new standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. We will adopt this new standard on January 1, 2019 and we expect to use the modified retrospective method of adoption as permitted by the standard. We are developing enhanced contracting and lease evaluation processes and information systems to support such processes, as well as new and enhanced accounting systems to account for our leases and support the required disclosures. We continue to evaluate the effect that adopting this standard will have on our financial statements and related disclosures. In March 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-07, “Compensation—Retirement Benefits (Topic 715),” which requires employers to report the service cost component of net periodic pension cost and net periodic postretirement benefit cost in the same line item as other compensation costs arising from services rendered by the pertinent employees during the period. It also requires the other components of net periodic pension cost and net periodic postretirement benefit cost (non-service cost components) to be presented in the income statement separately from the service cost component and outside a subtotal of income from operations. This ASU is to be applied retrospectively for income statement items and prospectively for any capitalized benefit costs. The provisions of this ASU are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this ASU effective January 1, 2018 will not affect our financial position or results of operations, but will result in the reclassification of the non-service cost components from “operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization)” and “general and administrative expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization)” to “other income, net.” In May 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-09, “Compensation—Stock Compensation (Topic 718),” to reduce diversity in practice, as well as reduce cost and complexity regarding a change to the terms or conditions 7 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) of a share-based payment award. The provisions of this ASU are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this ASU effective January 1, 2018 will not have an immediate effect on our financial position or results of operations as it will be applied prospectively to an award modified on or after adoption. In August 2017, the FASB issued ASU No. 2017-12, “Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815),” to improve and simplify accounting guidance for hedge accounting. The provisions of this ASU are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. We use economic hedges to manage commodity price risk; however, we have not designated these hedges as fair value or cash flow hedges. As a result, the adoption of this ASU effective January 1, 2019 is not expected to affect our financial position or results of operations. Cost Classifications “Cost of materials and other” primarily includes the cost of materials that are a component of our products sold. These costs include (i) the direct cost of materials (such as crude oil and other refinery feedstocks, refined petroleum products and blendstocks, and ethanol feedstocks and products) that are a component of our products sold; (ii) costs related to the delivery (such as shipping and handling costs) of products sold; (iii) costs related to our environmental credit obligations to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs (such as the cost of renewable identification numbers (RINs) as required by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Renewable Fuel Standard and emission credits under various cap-and-trade systems, as defined in Note 12 ); (iv) gains and losses on our commodity derivative instruments; and (v) certain excise taxes. “Operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense)” include costs to operate our refineries, ethanol plants, and VLP’s logistics assets, except for depreciation and amortization expense. These costs primarily include employee-related expenses, energy and utility costs, catalysts and chemical costs, and repairs and maintenance expenses. “Depreciation and amortization expense” associated with our operations is separately presented in our statement of income as a component of cost of sales and is disclosed by reportable segment in Note 10 . “Other operating expenses” include costs, if any, incurred by our reportable segments that are not associated with our cost of sales. Prior to the Aruba Disposition discussed below, we recognized an asset impairment loss of $56 million in June 2016 representing all of the remaining carrying value of our long-lived assets in Aruba. These assets were primarily related to our crude oil and refined petroleum products terminal and transshipment facility in Aruba (collectively, the Aruba Terminal), which were included in our refining segment. We recognized the impairment loss at that time because we concluded that it was more likely than not that we would ultimately transfer ownership of these assets to the Government of Aruba (GOA) as a result of agreements entered into in June 2016 between the GOA, CITGO Aruba Refining N.V. (CAR), and CITGO Petroleum Corporation (together with CAR and certain other affiliates, collectively, CITGO) providing for, among other things, the 8 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) GOA’s lease of those assets to CITGO. (See Note 12 for disclosure related to the method to determine fair value.) In September 2016 and in connection with the Aruba Disposition discussed below, our U.S. subsidiaries were unable to collect outstanding debt obligations owed to them by our Aruba subsidiaries, which resulted in the recognition by us of an income tax benefit in the U.S. of $42 million during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016 . We had no income tax effect in Aruba from the cancellation of debt or other effects of the Aruba Disposition because of net operating loss carryforwards associated with our operations in Aruba against which we had previously recorded a full valuation allowance. Effective October 1, 2016, we (i) transferred ownership of all of our assets in Aruba, other than certain hydrocarbon inventories and working capital, to Refineria di Aruba N.V., an entity wholly-owned by the GOA, (ii) settled our obligations under various agreements with the GOA, including agreements that required us to dismantle our leasehold improvements under certain conditions, and (iii) sold the working capital of our Aruba operations, including hydrocarbon inventories, to the GOA and CITGO. We refer to this transaction as the “Aruba Disposition.” The agreements associated with the Aruba Disposition were finalized in September 2016, including approval of such agreements by the Aruba Parliament. We no longer own any assets or have any operations in Aruba. Inventories consisted of the following (in millions): Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market. As of December 31, 2015 , we had a valuation reserve of $766 million in order to state our inventories at market. We recorded a change in our lower of cost or market inventory valuation reserve that resulted in a net benefit to our results of operations of $747 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2016 . As of September 30, 2017 and December 31, 2016 , the replacement cost (market value) of LIFO inventories exceeded their LIFO carrying amounts by $1.9 billion for both periods. As of September 30, 2017 and December 31, 2016 , our non-LIFO inventories accounted for $770 million and $641 million , respectively, of our total inventories. 9 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Debt There was no significant activity related to our debt during the nine months ended September 30, 2017 . During the nine months ended September 30, 2016 , the following activity occurred related to our debt: We had outstanding borrowings, letters of credit issued, and availability under our credit facilities as follows (in millions): Letters of credit issued as of September 30, 2017 expire at various times in 2017 through 2020 . In June 2017 , one of our committed letter of credit facilities with a borrowing capacity of $125 million expired and was not renewed. As of September 30, 2017 and December 31, 2016 , the borrowings on the VLP Revolver bear interest at a variable rate, which was 2.75 percent and 2.3125 percent, respectively. As of September 30, 2017 and 10 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) December 31, 2016 , the variable interest rate on the accounts receivable sales facility was 1.9124 percent and 1.3422 percent, respectively. In October 2017, one of our Canadian subsidiaries amended its committed revolving credit facility (the Canadian Revolver) to increase the borrowing capacity from C$25 million to C$75 million under which it may borrow and obtain letters of credit and to extend the maturity date from November 2017 to November 2018 . In connection with VLP’s acquisitions of Parkway Pipeline LLC and Valero Partners Port Arthur, LLC, subsidiaries of ours that own certain pipeline and terminaling assets, VLP borrowed $118 million and $262 million , respectively, under the VLP Revolver on November 1, 2017. These borrowings bear interest at variable rates, which were 2.75 percent and 2.875 percent, respectively, as of November 1, 2017. Other Disclosures Interest and debt expense, net of capitalized interest is comprised of the following (in millions): Capital Leases In January 2017, we recognized capital lease assets and related obligations totaling approximately $490 million for the lease of storage tanks located at three of our refineries. These lease agreements have initial terms of 10 years each with successive 10 -year automatic renewals. MVP Terminal We have a 50 percent membership interest in MVP Terminalling, LLC (MVP), a Delaware limited liability company formed in September 2017 with a subsidiary of Magellan Midstream Partners LP (Magellan), to construct, own, and operate the Magellan Valero Pasadena marine terminal (MVP Terminal) located adjacent to the Houston Ship Channel in Pasadena, Texas. The MVP Terminal will contain (i) approximately 5 million barrels of storage capacity, (ii) a dock with two ship berths, and (iii) a three-bay truck rack facility. In connection with our terminaling agreement with MVP, described below, we will have dedicated use of (i) approximately 4 million barrels of storage, (ii) one ship berth, and (iii) the three-bay truck rack facility. Construction began in 2017 with a total estimated cost of $840 million for phases one and two of the project, of which we expect to contribute 50 percent (approximately $420 million ). The project could expand up to four phases with a total project cost of approximately $1.4 billion if warranted by additional demand and agreed to by Magellan and us. We have contributed $77 million to MVP through September 2017; no further contributions are required to be made during the remainder of 2017. 11 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Concurrent with the formation of MVP, we entered into a terminalling agreement with MVP to utilize the MVP Terminal upon completion of phase two of construction, which is expected to occur in early 2020. The terminalling agreement has an initial term of 12 years with two five -year automatic renewals, and year-to-year renewals thereafter. Due to our membership interest in MVP and because the terminalling agreement was determined to be a capital lease, we are the accounting owner of the MVP Terminal during the construction period. Accordingly, as of September 30, 2017 , we recorded an asset of $110 million in property, plant, and equipment for 100 percent of the construction costs incurred by MVP and a long-term liability of $55 million payable to Magellan. The amounts recorded for the portion of the construction costs associated with the payable to Magellan are noncash investing and financing items, respectively. Central Texas Pipeline and Terminal Projects We have a 40 percent undivided interest in a project with a subsidiary of Magellan to jointly build a 135 -mile, 16 -inch refined petroleum products pipeline with a capacity of up to 150,000 barrels per day from Houston to Hearne, Texas. The pipeline is expected to be completed in mid-2019. Our estimated cost for our 40 percent undivided interest in this pipeline is $170 million . In addition, we will separately build, own, and operate a terminal in Hearne, a terminal in Williamson County, Texas, and a 70 -mile, 12 -inch refined petroleum products pipeline connecting the two terminals. The new pipeline and terminals are expected to supply up to 60,000 barrels per day into the central Texas area. Our estimated cost for these projects is $210 million with expected completion in mid-2019. Environmental Matters We are involved, together with several other companies, in an environmental cleanup in the Village of Hartford, Illinois (the Village) and during 2015, one of these companies assumed the ongoing remediation in the Village pursuant to a federal court order. We had previously conducted an initial response in the Village, along with other companies, pursuant to an administrative order issued by the EPA. The parties involved in the initial response may have further claims among themselves for costs already incurred. We also continue to be engaged in site assessment and interim measures at the adjacent shutdown refinery site, which we acquired as part of an acquisition in 2005, and we are in litigation with other potentially responsible parties and the Illinois EPA relating to the remediation of the site. In each of these matters, we have various defenses, limitations, and potential rights for contribution from the other responsible parties. We have recorded a liability for our expected contribution obligations. However, because of the unpredictable nature of these cleanups, the methodology for allocation of liabilities, and the State of Illinois’ failure to directly sue third parties responsible for historic contamination at the site, it is reasonably possible that we could incur a loss in a range of $0 to $200 million in excess of the amount of our accrual to ultimately resolve these matters. Factors underlying this estimated range are expected to change from time to time, and actual results may vary significantly from this estimate. Litigation Matters We are party to claims and legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. We have not recorded a loss contingency liability with respect to some of these matters because we have determined that it is remote that a loss has been incurred. For other matters, we have recorded a loss contingency liability where we have determined that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and that the loss is reasonably estimable. These 12 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) loss contingency liabilities are not material to our financial position. We re-evaluate and update our loss contingency liabilities as matters progress over time, and we believe that any changes to the recorded liabilities will not be material to our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. Reconciliation of Balances The following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of equity attributable to our stockholders, equity attributable to noncontrolling interests, and total equity (in millions): ___________________ 13 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Share Activity Activity in the number of shares of common stock and treasury stock was as follows (in millions): Common Stock Dividends On November 1, 2017 , our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.70 per common share payable on December 12, 2017 to holders of record at the close of business on November 21, 2017 . Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss by component, net of tax, were as follows (in millions): 14 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Consolidated VIEs In the normal course of business, we have financial interests in certain entities that have been determined to be VIEs. We consolidate a VIE when we have a variable interest in an entity for which we are the primary beneficiary such that we have (a) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (b) the obligation to absorb losses of or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. In order to make this determination, we evaluated our contractual arrangements with the VIEs, including arrangements for the use of assets, purchases of products and services, debt, equity, or management of operating activities. Our significant VIE’s include: The VIEs’ assets can only be used to settle their own obligations and the VIEs’ creditors have no recourse to our assets. We do not provide financial guarantees to our VIEs. Although we have provided credit facilities to the VIEs in support of their construction or acquisition activities, these transactions are eliminated in consolidation. Our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows are impacted by our consolidated VIEs’ performance, net of intercompany eliminations, to the extent of our ownership interest in each VIE. The following tables present summarized balance sheet information for the significant assets and liabilities of our VIEs, which are included in our balance sheets (in millions). 15 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Non-Consolidated VIEs We hold variable interests in VIEs that have not been consolidated because we are not considered the primary beneficiary. These non-consolidated VIEs are not material to our financial position or results of operations and are primarily accounted for as equity investments. However, one of our non-consolidated VIEs is accounted for under owner accounting and is further described below and in Note 5 . As described in Note 5 , we have a 50 percent membership interest in MVP, which was formed to construct, own, and operate the MVP Terminal. MVP was determined to be a VIE because the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact its economic performance is not required to be held by its two members, but is held by Magellan, as operator under a construction, operating, and management agreement with MVP. For this reason and because Magellan holds a 50 percent interest in MVP that provides it with significant economic rights and obligations, we determined that we are not the primary beneficiary. As of September 30, 2017 , our maximum exposure to loss was $77 million , which represents our equity investment in MVP. 16 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The components of net periodic benefit cost (credit) related to our defined benefit plans were as follows (in millions): We contributed $104 million and $132 million , respectively, to our pension plans and $17 million and $12 million , respectively, to our other postretirement benefit plans during the nine months ended September 30, 2017 and 2016 . Of the $104 million contributed to our pension plans during the nine months ended September 30, 2017 , $80 million was discretionary and was contributed during the third quarter of 2017. As a result of the discretionary pension contributions discussed above, our expected contributions to our pension plans have increased to $108 million for 2017. Our anticipated contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans during 2017 have not changed from the amount previously disclosed in our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2016 . 17 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Earnings per common share were computed as follows (dollars and shares in millions, except per share amounts): 18 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Participating securities include restricted stock and performance awards granted under our 2011 Omnibus Stock Incentive Plan. 19 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Effective January 1, 2017, we revised our reportable segments to align with certain changes in how our chief operating decision maker manages and allocates resources to our business. Accordingly, we created a new reportable segment — VLP. The results of the VLP segment, which include the results of our majority-owned master limited partnership referred to by the same name, were transferred from the refining segment. Our prior period segment information has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect our current segment presentation. As a result, we have three reportable segments as follows: Operations that are not included in any of the reportable segments are included in the corporate category. Our reportable segments are strategic business units that offer different products and services. They are managed separately as each business requires unique technologies and marketing strategies. Performance is evaluated based on segment operating income, which includes revenues and expenses that are directly attributable to the management of the respective segment. Intersegment sales are generally derived from transactions made at prevailing market rates. 20 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The following table reflects activity related to our reportable segments (in millions): 21 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) 22 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Total assets by reportable segment were as follows (in millions): In order to determine net cash provided by operating activities, net income is adjusted by, among other things, changes in current assets and current liabilities as follows (in millions): Noncash investing and financing activities during the nine months ended September 30, 2017 included the recognition of (i) a capital lease asset and related obligation associated with an agreement for storage tanks near three of our refineries as described in Note 4 and (ii) terminal assets and related obligation recorded under owner accounting as described in Note 5 . There were no significant noncash investing and financing activities during the nine months ended September 30, 2016 . Cash flows reflected as “other financing activities, net” for the nine months ended September 30, 2016 included the payment of a long-term liability of $137 million owed to a joint venture partner associated with an owner-method joint venture investment. 23 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Cash flows related to interest and income taxes were as follows (in millions): Recurring Fair Value Measurements The tables below present information (in millions) about our assets and liabilities recognized at their fair values in our balance sheets categorized according to the fair value hierarchy of the inputs utilized by us to determine the fair values as of September 30, 2017 and December 31, 2016 . We have elected to offset the fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty, including any related cash collateral assets or obligations as shown below; however, fair value amounts by hierarchy level are presented in the tables below on a gross basis. We have no derivative contracts that are subject to master netting arrangements that are reflected gross on the balance sheet. 24 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) A description of our assets and liabilities recognized at fair value along with the valuation methods and inputs we used to develop their fair value measurements are as follows: 25 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) There were no transfers between levels for assets and liabilities held as of September 30, 2017 and December 31, 2016 that were measured at fair value on a recurring basis. There was no significant activity during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2017 and 2016 related to the fair value amounts categorized in Level 3 as of September 30, 2017 and December 31, 2016 . Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements As discussed in Note 2 , we concluded that the Aruba Terminal was impaired as of June 30, 2016, which resulted in an asset impairment loss of $56 million that was recorded in June 2016. The fair value of the Aruba Terminal was determined using an income approach and was classified in Level 3. We employed a probability-weighted approach to possible future cash flow scenarios, including transferring ownership of the business to the GOA or continuing to operate the business. There were no assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of September 30, 2017 and December 31, 2016 . 26 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Other Financial Instruments Financial instruments that we recognize in our balance sheets at their carrying amounts are shown in the table below along with their associated fair values (in millions): The methods and significant assumptions used to estimate the fair value of these financial instruments are as follows: We are exposed to market risks primarily related to the volatility in the price of commodities, and foreign currency exchange rates, and the price of credits needed to comply with various government and regulatory programs. We enter into derivative instruments to manage some of these risks, including derivative instruments related to the various commodities we purchase or produce, and foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts, as described below under “Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk.” These derivative instruments are recorded as either assets or liabilities measured at their fair values (see Note 12 ), as summarized below under “Fair Values of Derivative Instruments,” with changes in fair value recognized currently in income. The effect of these derivative instruments on our income is summarized below under “Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income.” Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk Commodity Price Risk We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined petroleum products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including futures, swaps, and options. We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our hedging and trading operations. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. 27 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) To manage commodity price risk, we use economic hedges, which are not designated as fair value or cash flow hedges, and we use fair value and cash flow hedges from time to time. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes. Our objectives for entering into hedges or trading derivatives are described below. As of September 30, 2017 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were used as economic hedges, as well as commodity derivative instruments related to the physical purchase of corn at a fixed price. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels, except those identified as corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels and soybean oil contracts that are presented in thousands of pounds). 28 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) As of September 30, 2017 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into for trading purposes. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels, except those identified as natural gas contracts that are presented in billions of British thermal units and corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels). We had no commodity derivative contracts outstanding as of September 30, 2017 and 2016 or during the nine months ended September 30, 2017 and 2016 that were designated as fair value or cash flow hedges. Foreign Currency Risk We are exposed to exchange rate fluctuations on transactions entered into by our international operations that are denominated in currencies other than the local (functional) currencies of those operations. To manage our exposure to these exchange rate fluctuations, we use foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts. These contracts are not designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes and therefore are classified as economic hedges. As of September 30, 2017 , we had forward contracts to purchase $514 million of U.S. dollars. These commitments matured on or before October 31, 2017 . Environmental Compliance Program Price Risk We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory environmental compliance programs. To manage this risk, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. Certain of these programs require us to blend biofuels into the products we produce, and we are subject to such programs in most of the countries in which we operate. These countries set annual quotas 29 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) for the percentage of biofuels that must be blended into the motor fuels consumed in these countries. As a producer of motor fuels from petroleum, we are obligated to blend biofuels into the products we produce at a rate that is at least equal to the applicable quota. To the degree we are unable to blend at the applicable rate, we must purchase biofuel credits (primarily RINs in the U.S.). We are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits, and we manage that risk by purchasing biofuel credits when prices are deemed favorable. The cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was $230 million and $198 million for the three months ended September 30, 2017 and 2016 , respectively, and $631 million and $532 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2017 and 2016 , respectively. These amounts are reflected in cost of materials and other. We are subject to additional requirements under greenhouse gas (GHG) emission programs, including the cap-and-trade systems, as discussed in Note 12 . Under these cap-and-trade systems, we purchase various GHG emission credits available on the open market. Therefore, we are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits. The cost to implement certain provisions of the cap-and-trade systems are significant; however, we recovered the majority of these costs from our customers for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2017 and 2016 and expect to continue to recover the majority of these costs in the future. For the three and nine months ended September 30, 2017 and 2016 , the net cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was immaterial. Fair Values of Derivative Instruments The following tables provide information about the fair values of our derivative instruments as of September 30, 2017 and December 31, 2016 (in millions) and the line items in the balance sheets in which the fair values are reflected. See Note 12 for additional information related to the fair values of our derivative instruments. As indicated in Note 12 , we net fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty under master netting arrangements, including cash collateral assets and obligations. The tables below, however, are presented on a gross asset and gross liability basis, which results in the reflection of certain assets in liability accounts and certain liabilities in asset accounts. 30 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Market Risk Our price risk management activities involve the receipt or payment of fixed price commitments into the future. These transactions give rise to market risk, which is the risk that future changes in market conditions may make an instrument less valuable. We closely monitor and manage our exposure to market risk on a daily basis in accordance with policies approved by our board of directors. Market risks are monitored by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy. We do not require any collateral or other security to support derivative instruments into which we enter. We also do not have any derivative instruments that require us to maintain a minimum investment-grade credit rating. Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income The following tables provide information about the gain or loss recognized in income on our derivative instruments and the income statement line items in which such gains and losses are reflected (in millions). 31 Table of Contents ITEM 2. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS CAUTIONARY STATEMENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF SAFE HARBOR PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995 This Form 10-Q, including without limitation our disclosures below under the heading “OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK , ” includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. You can identify our forward-looking statements by the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “expect,” “plan,” “intend,” “estimate,” “project,” “projection,” “predict,” “budget,” “forecast,” “goal,” “guidance,” “target,” “could,” “should,” “may,” and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements include, among other things, statements regarding: We based our forward-looking statements on our current expectations, estimates, and projections about ourselves and our industry. We caution that these statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that we cannot predict. In addition, we based many of these forward-looking statements on assumptions about future events that may prove to be inaccurate. Accordingly, our actual results may differ materially from the future performance that we have expressed or forecast in the forward-looking statements. Differences between actual results and any future performance suggested in these forward-looking statements could result from a variety of factors, including the following: 32 Table of Contents Any one of these factors, or a combination of these factors, could materially affect our future results of operations and whether any forward-looking statements ultimately prove to be accurate. Our forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and actual results and future performance may differ materially from those suggested in any forward-looking statements. We do not intend to update these statements unless we are required by the securities laws to do so. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing. We undertake no obligation to publicly release any revisions to any such forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. This Form 10-Q includes references to financial measures that are not defined under U.S. GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures include refining and ethanol segment margin and adjusted operating income. We have included these non-GAAP financial measures to help facilitate the comparison of operating results between periods. See the accompanying financial tables in “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” and note (e) to the accompanying tables for reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures. Also in note (e), we disclose the reasons why we believe our use of the non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information. 33 Table of Contents OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK Overview Third Quarter Results In the third quarter of 2017 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders of $841 million compared to $613 million in the third quarter of 2016 , which represents an increase of $228 million . This increase is primarily due to higher operating income between the periods (net of the resulting increase of $234 million in income tax expense). Operating income was $1.3 billion in the third quarter of 2017 compared to $892 million in the third quarter of 2016 , which represents an increase of $446 million . Operating income in the third quarter of 2017 was negatively impacted by $44 million of damages associated with Hurricane Harvey, which are reflected in other operating expenses. By excluding these expenses, adjusted operating income was $1.4 billion for the third quarter of 2017 , which is an increase of $490 million compared to operating income of $892 million in the third quarter of 2016 . The $490 million increase in adjusted operating income is due primarily to the following: First Nine Months Results In the first nine months of 2017 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders of $1.7 billion compared to $1.9 billion in the first nine months of 2016 , which represents a decrease of $228 million . This decrease is primarily due to lower operating income between the periods. Operating income was $2.7 billion in the first nine months of 2017 compared to $3.0 billion in the first nine months of 2016 , which represents a decrease of $206 million . Operating income in the first nine months of 2017 was negatively impacted by $44 million of damages associated with Hurricane Harvey, which are reflected in other operating expenses. By excluding these other operating expenses, adjusted operating income was $2.8 billion for the first nine months of 2017 . 34 Table of Contents Operating income in the first nine months of 2016 was positively impacted by a noncash benefit from a lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment partially offset by a noncash charge from an impairment loss related to our Aruba Terminal. By excluding these items, adjusted operating income was $2.3 billion . Comparing these adjusted amounts, adjusted operating income in the first nine months of 2017 increased by $529 million compared to the first nine months of 2016 . The $529 million increase in adjusted operating income is due primarily to the following: Additional details and analysis of the changes in operating income and adjusted operating income for our business segments and other components of net income, including a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures used in this Overview to their most comparable measures reported under U.S. GAAP, are provided below under “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” beginning on page 36 . Effective January 1, 2017 , we revised our reportable segments to reflect a new reportable segment — VLP. The results of operations of the VLP segment were previously included in the refining segment. Our prior period segment information has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect our current segment presentation. See Note 10 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional segment information. 35 Table of Contents Outlook Below are several factors that have impacted or may impact our results of operations during the fourth quarter of 2017 : RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following tables highlight our results of operations, our operating performance, and market prices that directly impact our operations. In addition, these tables include financial measures that are not defined under U.S. GAAP and represent non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are reconciled to their most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures and include adjusted operating income and refining and ethanol segment margin. In note (e) to these tables, we disclose the reasons why we believe our use of non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information. Effective January 1, 2017, we revised our reportable segments to align with certain changes in how our chief operating decision maker manages and allocates resources to our business. Accordingly, we created a new reportable segment — VLP. The results of the VLP segment, which include the results of our majority-owned master limited partnership referred to by the same name, were transferred from the refining segment. Our prior period segment information has been retrospectively adjusted to reflect our current segment presentation. The narrative following these tables provides an analysis of our results of operations. 36 Table of Contents Third Quarter Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (millions of dollars) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 37 Table of Contents Third Quarter Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (continued) (millions of dollars) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 38 Table of Contents Third Quarter Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (continued) (millions of dollars) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 39 Table of Contents Third Quarter Results - Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 40 Table of Contents Third Quarter Results - Ethanol Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) Third Quarter Results - VLP Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 41 Table of Contents Third Quarter Results - Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 42 Table of Contents Total Company, Corporate, and Other Operating revenues increased $3.9 billion in the third quarter of 2017 compared to the third quarter of 2016 primarily due to increases in refined petroleum product prices associated with our refining segment. This improvement in operating revenues was partially offset by higher cost of materials and other of $3.3 billion , as well as increases in operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense), depreciation and amortization expense, other operating expenses, and general and administrative expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) of $63 million , $27 million, $44 million , and $37 million , respectively. These changes resulted in an increase in operating income of $446 million , from $892 million in the third quarter of 2016 to $1.3 billion in the third quarter of 2017 . Excluding the $44 million of damages associated with Hurricane Harvey, which are reflected in other operating expenses, adjusted operating income for the third quarter of 2017 increased $490 million. Details regarding changes in segment margins, operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense), and depreciation and amortization expense are discussed by segment in the individual segment analysis below. General and administrative expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) increased by $37 million in the third quarter of 2017 compared to the third quarter of 2016 primarily due to expenses associated with the termination of the acquisition of certain assets from Plains of $16 million and higher employee related costs of $11 million. Income tax expense increased $234 million from the third quarter of 2016 to the third quarter of 2017 primarily as a result of higher income before income tax expense. The effective tax rates of 30 percent in the third quarter of 2017 and 18 percent in the third quarter of 2016 are lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 35 percent primarily because income from our international operations is taxed at statutory rates that are lower than in the U.S. The effective tax rate in the third quarter of 2016 was also impacted by a benefit of $42 million associated with our Aruba disposition and a benefit of $35 million resulting from the favorable resolution of an income tax audit. The Aruba disposition matter is more fully described in Note 2 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Refining Segment Results Refining segment operating revenues increased $4.0 billion and cost of materials and other increased $3.4 billion in the third quarter of 2017 compared to the third quarter of 2016 primarily due to increases in refined petroleum product prices and crude oil feedstocks, respectively. The resulting $617 million increase in refining segment margin was partially offset by increases in operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense), depreciation and amortization expense associated with our cost of sales, and other operating expenses of $55 million , $26 million , and $41 million , respectively, resulting in an increase in operating income of $495 million , from $934 million in the third quarter of 2016 to $1.4 billion in the third quarter of 2017 . Excluding the $41 million of damages associated with Hurricane Harvey, which are reflected in other operating expenses, adjusted operating income for the third quarter of 2017 increased $536 million . The reasons for this increase are described below. As previously noted, refining segment margin increased $617 million in the third quarter of 2017 compared to the third quarter of 2016 , primarily due to the following: 43 Table of Contents based benchmark reference margin for U.S. Gulf Coast ultra-low-sulfur diesel was $15.89 per barrel in the third quarter of 2017 compared to $10.63 per barrel in the third quarter of 2016 , representing a favorable increase of $5.26 per barrel. Another example is the Brent-based benchmark reference margin for North Atlantic ultra-low-sulfur diesel that was $17.06 per barrel in the third quarter of 2017 compared to $11.52 per barrel in the third quarter of 2016 , representing a favorable increase of $5.54 per barrel. We estimate that the increase in distillate margins in the third quarter of 2017 compared to the third quarter of 2016 had a favorable impact to our refining segment margin of approximately $385 million. 44 Table of Contents of these credits (primarily RINs in the U.S.) increased by $32 million from $198 million in the third quarter of 2016 to $230 million in the third quarter of 2017 . The increase of $55 million in refining segment operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) was primarily due to an increase in energy costs driven by higher natural gas prices ($ 2.91 per MMBtu in the third quarter of 2017 compared to $ 2.80 per MMBtu in the third quarter of 2016 ). The increase of $26 million in depreciation and amortization expense associated with our cost of sales was primarily due to an increase in refinery turnaround and catalyst amortization expense due to costs incurred in the latter part of 2016 in connection with significant turnaround projects at our Port Arthur and Texas City Refineries. Ethanol Segment Results Ethanol segment operating revenues decreased $105 million and cost of materials and other decreased $88 million in the third quarter of 2017 compared to the third quarter of 2016 primarily due to a decrease in ethanol sales volumes. The resulting $17 million decrease in ethanol segment margin, along with higher operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) of $7 million , resulted in a decrease in operating income of $24 million , from $106 million in the third quarter of 2016 to $82 million in the third quarter of 2017 . The reasons for this decrease are described below. As previously noted, ethanol segment margin decreased $17 million in the third quarter of 2017 compared to the third quarter of 2016 primarily due to the following: VLP Segment Results VLP segment operating revenues increased $18 million in the third quarter of 2017 compared to the third quarter of 2016 primarily due to incremental revenues generated from transportation and terminaling services provided to the refining segment associated with a business acquired during the third quarter of 2016 and assets acquired in January 2017 , as discussed below. This $18 million increase in revenues was partially offset by higher operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) and other operating expenses of $2 million and $3 million , respectively, resulting in an increase in operating income of $13 million . Excluding the $3 million of damages associated with Hurricane Harvey, which are reflected in 45 Table of Contents other operating expenses, adjusted operating income increased by $16 million compared to the third quarter of 2016 . VLP segment operating revenues increased $18 million in the third quarter of 2017 compared to the third quarter of 2016 , primarily due to the following: 46 Table of Contents First Nine Months Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (millions of dollars) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 47 Table of Contents First Nine Months Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (continued) (millions of dollars) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 48 Table of Contents First Nine Months Results - Financial Highlights By Segment and Total Company (continued) (millions of dollars) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 49 Table of Contents First Nine Months Results - Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 50 Table of Contents First Nine Months Results - Ethanol Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) First Nine Months Results - VLP Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 51 Table of Contents First Nine Months Results - Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) ___________________ See note references on pages 53 through 55 . 52 Table of Contents The following notes relate to references on pages 37 through 42 and 47 through 52 . In June 2016, we recognized an asset impairment loss of $56 million representing all of the remaining carrying value of the long-lived assets of our crude oil and refined petroleum products terminal and transshipment facility in Aruba (collectively, the Aruba Terminal). We recognized the impairment loss at that time because we concluded that it was more likely than not that we would ultimately transfer ownership of these assets to the GOA as a result of agreements entered into in June 2016 between the GOA and CITGO providing for, among other things, the GOA’s lease of those assets to CITGO. In September 2016 and in connection with the Aruba Disposition, our U.S. subsidiaries cancelled all outstanding debt obligations owed to them by our Aruba subsidiaries, which resulted in the recognition by us of an income tax benefit in the U.S. of $42 million during the three and nine months ended September 30, 2016. This matter is further discussed in Note 2 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. We have defined these non-GAAP measures and believe they are useful to the external users of our financial statements, including industry analysts, investors, lenders, and rating agencies. We believe these measures are useful to assess our ongoing financial performance because, when reconciled to their most comparable U.S. GAAP measures, they provide improved comparability between periods through the exclusion of certain items that we believe are not indicative of our core operating performance and that may obscure our underlying business results and trends. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered as alternatives to their most comparable U.S. GAAP measures nor should they be considered in isolation or as a substitute for an analysis of our results of operations as reported under U.S. GAAP. In addition, these non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies because we may define them differently, which diminishes the utility of these measures. 53 Table of Contents Non-GAAP measures are as follows: 54 Table of Contents Total Company, Corporate, and Other Operating revenues increased $12.6 billion in the first nine months of 2017 compared to the first nine months of 2016 primarily due to increases in refined petroleum product prices associated with our refining segment, and we also benefitted from the positive effect from the $56 million asset impairment loss related to our Aruba Terminal in 2016. These items were more than offset by higher cost of materials and other of $11.7 billion and the negative effect from the $747 million lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment in the first nine months of 2016 , as well as increases in operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense), depreciation and amortization expense, other operating expenses, and general and administrative expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) of $246 million , $70 million, $44 million , and $90 million , respectively. These changes resulted in a decrease in operating income of $206 million , from $3.0 billion in the first nine months of 2016 to $2.7 billion in the first nine months of 2017 . Excluding the $44 million of damages associated with Hurricane Harvey, which are reflected in other operating expenses, from 2017 operating income and the $747 million benefit from the lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment and the asset impairment loss of $56 million related to our Aruba Terminal from 2016 operating income, adjusted operating income in the first nine months of 2017 increased by $529 million. Details regarding changes in segment margins, operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense), and depreciation and amortization expense are discussed by segment in the individual segment analysis below. General and administrative expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) increased by $90 million in the first nine months of 2017 compared to the first nine months of 2016 primarily due to an increase in legal and environmental reserves of $25 million, higher employee related costs of $20 million, expenses associated with the termination of the acquisition of certain assets from Plains of $16 million, and increases in charitable contributions and advertising expenses of $6 million and $5 million, respectively. Income tax expense increased $34 million from the first nine months of 2016 to the first nine months of 2017 despite lower income before income tax expense primarily due to tax benefits recognized in the first nine months of 2016 associated with our Aruba disposition and the favorable resolution of an income tax audit. The effective tax rates of 28 percent in the first nine months of 2017 and 25 percent in the first nine months of 2016 are lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 35 percent primarily because income from our international operations is taxed at statutory rates that are lower than in the U.S. The effective tax rate in the first nine months of 2016 was lower than the rate in the first nine months of 2017 due to the $42 million tax benefit associated with our Aruba disposition and the $35 million tax benefit resulting from the favorable resolution of an income tax audit. 55 Table of Contents Refining Segment Results Refining segment operating revenues increased $12.7 billion and cost of materials and other increased $11.9 billion in the first nine months of 2017 compared to the first nine months of 2016 primarily due to increases in refined petroleum product prices and crude oil feedstock costs, respectively. The resulting $857 million increase in refining segment margin along with the positive effect from the $56 million asset impairment loss related to our Aruba Terminal in 2016, was more than offset by the negative effect from the $697 million lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment in the first nine months of 2016 , as well as increases in operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense), depreciation and amortization expense associated with our cost of sales, and other operating expenses of $219 million , $50 million , and $41 million , respectively. These changes resulted in a decrease in operating income of $94 million , from $3.1 billion in the first nine months of 2016 to $3.0 billion in the first nine months of 2017 . Excluding the $41 million of damages associated with Hurricane Harvey, which are reflected in other operating expenses, from 2017 operating income and the $697 million benefit from the lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment and the $56 million asset impairment loss related to our Aruba Terminal from 2016 operating income, adjusted operating income for the first nine months of 2017 increased $588 million . The reasons for this increase are described below. As previously noted, refining segment margin increased $857 million in the first nine months of 2017 compared to the first nine months of 2016 , primarily due to the following: 56 Table of Contents that are priced at a discount to Brent crude oil when pricing terms are favorable. While we benefitted from processing these types of feedstocks in the first nine months of 2017 , that benefit declined compared to the first nine months of 2016 . We estimate that the reduction in the discounts for the other feedstocks that we processed in the first nine months of 2017 had an unfavorable impact to our refining segment margin of approximately $227 million. The increase of $219 million in refining segment operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) was primarily due to an increase in energy costs driven by higher natural gas prices ($ 3.00 per MMBtu in the first nine months of 2017 compared to $ 2.27 per MMBtu in the first nine months of 2016 ). The increase of $50 million in depreciation and amortization expense associated with our cost of sales was due to an increase in refinery turnaround and catalyst amortization expense primarily due to costs incurred in the latter part of 2016 in connection with significant turnaround projects at our Port Arthur and Texas City Refineries. Ethanol Segment Results Ethanol segment operating revenues decreased $86 million and cost of materials and other decreased $97 million in the first nine months of 2017 compared to the first nine months of 2016 , primarily due to decreases in corn related co-product prices and corn prices, respectively. The resulting $11 million increase in ethanol segment margin was more than offset by the negative effect from the $50 million lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment in the first nine months of 2016 , as well as increases in operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) and depreciation and amortization expense associated with our cost of sales of $25 million and $15 million, respectively, resulting in a decrease in 57 Table of Contents operating income of $79 million , from $214 million in the first nine months of 2016 to $135 million in the first nine months of 2017 . The reasons for this decrease are described below. As previously noted, ethanol segment margin increased $11 million in the first nine months of 2017 compared to the first nine months of 2016 primarily due to the following: The increase of $25 million in ethanol segment operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense) was primarily due to an increase in energy costs driven by higher natural gas prices ($ 3.00 per MMBtu in the first nine months of 2017 compared to $ 2.27 per MMBtu in the first nine months of 2016 ). The increase of $15 million in ethanol segment depreciation and amortization expense associated with our cost of sales was primarily due to the write-off of assets that were idled in the first nine months of 2017 . VLP Segment Results VLP segment operating revenues increased $68 million in the first nine months of 2017 compared to the first nine months of 2016 primarily due to incremental revenues generated from transportation and terminaling services provided to the refining segment associated with businesses and assets acquired in 2016 and early 2017 , as discussed below. This $68 million increase in revenues was partially offset by higher operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization expense), other operating expenses, and depreciation and amortization expense associated with our cost of sales of $3 million , $3 million , and $1 million , respectively, resulting in an increase in operating income of $61 million . Excluding the $3 million of damages associated with Hurricane Harvey, which are reflected in other operating expenses, adjusted operating income increased by $64 million compared to the first nine months of 2016 . 58 Table of Contents VLP segment operating revenues increased $68 million in the first nine months of 2017 compared to the first nine months of 2016 , primarily due to the following: LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Cash Flows for the Nine Months Ended September 30, 2017 Our operations generated $3.8 billion of cash in the first nine months of 2017 , driven primarily by net income of $1.8 billion , noncash charges to income of $1.6 billion , and a positive change in working capital of $544 million . Noncash charges included $1.5 billion of depreciation and amortization expense and $80 million of deferred income tax expense. See “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for further discussion of our operations. The change in our working capital is further detailed in Note 11 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. This source of cash mainly resulted from: The $3.8 billion of cash generated by our operations, along with (i) net proceeds of $36 million from VLP’s sale of common units representing limited partner interests to the public and (ii) $221 million from a favorable foreign exchange rate change on cash, were used mainly to: Cash Flows for the Nine Months Ended September 30, 2016 Our operations generated $3.8 billion of cash in the first nine months of 2016 , driven primarily by net income of $2.0 billion , noncash charges to income of $928 million , and a positive change in working capital of $953 million . Noncash charges included $1.4 billion of depreciation and amortization expense, $56 million 59 Table of Contents for the asset impairment loss associated with our Aruba Terminal, and $193 million of deferred income tax expense, partially offset by a benefit of $747 million from a lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment. See “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for further discussion of our operations. The change in our working capital is further detailed in Note 11 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. This source of cash mainly resulted from: The $3.8 billion of cash generated by our operations, along with $1.65 billion in proceeds from the issuance of debt (primarily $1.25 billion of 3.4 percent senior notes due September 15, 2026 and borrowings under the VLP Revolver of $349 million as discussed in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), were used mainly to: Capital Investments For 2017 , we expect to incur approximately $2.7 billion for capital investments, including capital expenditures, deferred turnaround and catalyst costs, equity-method joint venture investments, owner-method joint venture investments, and undivided interests in capital assets. This consists of approximately $1.6 billion for stay-in-business capital and $1.1 billion for growth strategies, including our investments described below. This capital investment estimate excludes potential strategic acquisitions. We continuously evaluate our capital budget and make changes as conditions warrant. We make investments in equity-method joint ventures, owner-method joint venture investments, undivided interests in certain assets, and new construction projects in order to enhance our operations. As of September 30, 2017 , capital commitments related to these investments included the following: 60 Table of Contents pipeline to our Houston and Texas City Refineries, the Colonial and Explorer pipelines, and Magellan’s Galena Park terminal facility. Magellan is the construction manager and will operate the completed terminal, with the completion of phase one and phase two expected in early 2019 and early 2020, respectively. The terminal is estimated to cost $840 million for phases one and two of the project and will be funded equally by Magellan and us. The project could expand up to four phases with total project cost of approximately $1.4 billion if warranted by additional demand and agreed to by Magellan and us. We have contributed $77 million to MVP through September 2017; no further contributions are required to be made during the remainder of 2017. In addition, we will separately build, own, and operate a terminal in Hearne, a terminal in Williamson County, Texas, and a 70-mile, 12-inch refined petroleum products pipeline connecting the two terminals. The new pipeline and terminals are expected to supply up to 60,000 barrels per day into the central Texas area. Our estimated cost for these projects is $210 million with expected completion in mid-2019. We have spent $5 million related to these projects through September 2017 and expect to spend $29 million during the remainder of 2017. Contractual Obligations As of September 30, 2017 , our contractual obligations included debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, purchase obligations, and other long-term liabilities. There were no material changes outside the ordinary course of business with respect to these contractual obligations during the nine months ended September 30, 2017 . However, in the ordinary course of business, we recognized capital lease assets and related obligations totaling approximately $490 million in January 2017 for the lease of storage tanks located at three of our refineries. These lease agreements have initial terms of 10 years each with successive 10 -year automatic renewals. Our debt and financing agreements do not have rating agency triggers that would automatically require us to post additional collateral. However, in the event of certain downgrades of our senior unsecured debt by the ratings agencies, the cost of borrowings under some of our bank credit facilities and other arrangements would increase. All of our ratings on our senior unsecured debt are at or above investment grade level as follows: 61 Table of Contents We cannot provide assurance that these ratings will remain in effect for any given period of time or that one or more of these ratings will not be lowered or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency. We note that these credit ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Any future reduction below investment grade or withdrawal of one or more of our credit ratings could have a material adverse impact on our ability to obtain short- and long-term financing and the cost of such financings. Summary of Credit Facilities Information about our outstanding borrowings, letters of credit issued, and availability under our credit facilities is reflected in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Other Matters Impacting Liquidity and Capital Resources Stock Purchase Program On September 21, 2016 , our board of directors authorized our purchase of up to an additional $2.5 billion of our outstanding common stock (the 2016 program) with no expiration date. This authorization was in addition to the remaining amount available under a $2.5 billion program authorized on July 13, 2015 (the 2015 program). During the first quarter of 2017, we completed our purchases under the 2015 program. As of September 30, 2017 , we had approximately $1.6 billion remaining available under the 2016 program. We have no obligation to make purchases under this program. Pension Plan Funding We contributed $104 million to our pension plans and $17 million to our other postretirement benefit plans during the nine months ended September 30, 2017 . During the fourth quarter of 2017, we plan to contribute approximately $4 million to our pension plans and $2 million to our other postretirement benefit plans. Environmental Matters Our operations are subject to extensive environmental regulations by governmental authorities relating to the discharge of materials into the environment, waste management, pollution prevention measures, GHG emissions, and characteristics and composition of gasolines and distillates. Because environmental laws and regulations are becoming more complex and stringent and new environmental laws and regulations are continuously being enacted or proposed, the level of future expenditures required for environmental matters could increase in the future as previously discussed above in “OUTLOOK.” In addition, any major upgrades in any of our operating facilities could require material additional expenditures to comply with environmental laws and regulations. See Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of our environmental matters. Tax Matters The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has ongoing audits related to our U.S. federal income tax returns from 2010 through 2015, and we have received Revenue Agent Reports (RARs) in connection with the 2010 and 2011 audit. We are contesting certain tax positions and assertions included in the RARs and continue to make progress in resolving certain of these matters with the IRS. We believe that the ultimate settlement of these audits will not be material to our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. Cash Held by Our International Subsidiaries As of September 30, 2017 , $3.3 billion of our cash and temporary cash investments was held by our international subsidiaries. A large portion of this cash can be returned to the U.S. without significant tax consequences, but the remaining amount would be subject to U.S. and certain foreign withholding taxes if it were returned to the U.S. The earnings of our international subsidiaries are taxed by the countries in which they are incorporated, and we intend to reinvest those earnings indefinitely in our international operations. 62 Table of Contents As a result, we have not accrued for U.S. taxes on those earnings. Cash provided by operating activities in the U.S. continues to be our primary source of funds to finance our U.S. operations and capital expenditures, as well as our dividends and share repurchases. Concentration of Customers Our operations have a concentration of customers in the refining industry and customers who are refined petroleum product wholesalers and retailers. These concentrations of customers may impact our overall exposure to credit risk, either positively or negatively, in that these customers may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other conditions. However, we believe that our portfolio of accounts receivable is sufficiently diversified to the extent necessary to minimize potential credit risk. Historically, we have not had any significant problems collecting our accounts receivable. Sources of Liquidity We believe that we have sufficient funds from operations and, to the extent necessary, from borrowings under our credit facilities, to fund our ongoing operating requirements. We expect that, to the extent necessary, we can raise additional funds from time to time through equity or debt financings in the public and private capital markets or the arrangement of additional credit facilities. However, there can be no assurances regarding the availability of any future financings or additional credit facilities or whether such financings or additional credit facilities can be made available on terms that are acceptable to us. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. As of September 30, 2017 , there were no significant changes to our critical accounting policies since the date our annual report on Form 10‑K for the year ended December 31, 2016 was filed. 63 Table of Contents COMMODITY PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined petroleum products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including swaps, futures, and options to manage the volatility of: We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our price risk activities. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes to take advantage of existing market conditions related to future results of operations and cash flows. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. The following sensitivity analysis includes all positions at the end of the reporting period with which we have market risk (in millions): See Note 13 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for notional volumes associated with these derivative contracts as of September 30, 2017 . 64 Table of Contents COMPLIANCE PROGRAM PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of biofuel credits and GHG emission credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. To manage these risks, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. As of September 30, 2017 , there was an immaterial amount of gain or loss in the fair value of derivative instruments that would result from a 10 percent increase or decrease in the underlying price of the contracts. See Note 13 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion about these compliance programs. INTEREST RATE RISK The following table provides information about our debt instruments (dollars in millions), the fair values of which are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Principal cash flows and related weighted-average interest rates by expected maturity dates are presented. ________________________ FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK As of September 30, 2017 , we had commitments to purchase $514 million of U.S. dollars. Our market risk was minimal on these contracts, as all of them matured on or before October 31, 2017 . 65 Table of Contents Our management has evaluated, with the participation of our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in             Rule 13a-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) as of the end of the period covered by this report, and has concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of September 30, 2017 . There has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during our last fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 66 Table of Contents PART II – OTHER INFORMATION The information below describes new proceedings or material developments in proceedings that we previously reported in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 . Litigation We incorporate by reference into this Item our disclosures made in Part I, Item 1 of this report included in Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under the caption “Environmental Matters” and “Litigation Matters.” Environmental Enforcement Matters While it is not possible to predict the outcome of the following environmental proceedings, if any one or more of them were decided against us, we believe that there would be no material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. We are reporting these proceedings to comply with SEC regulations, which require us to disclose certain information about proceedings arising under federal, state, or local provisions regulating the discharge of materials into the environment or protecting the environment if we reasonably believe that such proceedings will result in monetary sanctions of $100,000 or more. South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD ) (Wilmington Refinery). In our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 , we reported that we had multiple Notices of Violations (NOVs) issued by the SCAQMD. These NOVs are for alleged reporting violations and excess emissions at our Wilmington Refinery. We recently entered into a Settlement Agreement with the SCAQMD to resolve three NOVs, and we continue to work with the SCAQMD to resolve the remaining NOVs. U.S. EPA (Ardmore Refinery). In our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 , we reported that we had received a penalty demand in the amount of $730,820 from the U.S. EPA for alleged reporting violations at our Ardmore Refinery. We have resolved this matter with the U.S. EPA. People of the State of Illinois, ex rel. v. The Premcor Refining Group Inc., et al. , Third Judicial Circuit Court, Madison County (Case No. 03-CH-00459, filed May 29, 2003) (Hartford Refinery and terminal). In our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 , we reported that the Illinois EPA had filed suit against The Premcor Refining Group Inc. alleging violations of air and waste regulations at Premcor’s Hartford, Illinois terminal and closed refinery. We recently entered into a Partial Consent Order resolving various air and permitting violations. Our litigation with other potentially responsible parties (PRPs) and the Illinois EPA continues. We continue to assert our various defenses, limitations and potential rights for contribution from the other PRPs. 67 Table of Contents There have been no changes from the risk factors disclosed in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 . ___________________ 68 Table of Contents ___________________ 69 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. Date: November 7, 2017 70