10-Q 1 vloform10-qx6302016.htm 10-Q Document UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q (Mark One) For the quarterly period ended June 30, 2016 OR Commission File Number 1-13175 VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) One Valero Way San Antonio, Texas (Address of principal executive offices) 78249 (Zip Code) (210) 345-2000 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes þ No o Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes o No þ The number of shares of the registrant’s only class of common stock, $0.01 par value, outstanding as of July 29, 2016 was 461,340,907 . VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION TABLE OF CONTENTS i Table of Contents PART I – FINANCIAL INFORMATION Item 1. Financial Statements VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS (Millions of Dollars, Except Par Value) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 1 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME (Millions of Dollars, Except Per Share Amounts) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 2 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (Millions of Dollars) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 3 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (Millions of Dollars) (Unaudited) See Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 4 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Basis of Presentation As used in this report, the terms “Valero,” “we,” “us,” or “our” may refer to Valero Energy Corporation, one or more of its consolidated subsidiaries, or all of them taken as a whole. These unaudited financial statements have been prepared in accordance with United States (U.S.) generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for interim financial information and with the instructions to Form 10-Q and Article 10 of Regulation S-X of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and notes required by U.S. GAAP for complete financial statements. In the opinion of management, all adjustments considered necessary for a fair presentation have been included. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature unless disclosed otherwise. Financial information for the three and six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 included in these Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements is derived from our unaudited financial statements. Operating results for the three and six months ended June 30, 2016 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the year ending December 31, 2016. The balance sheet as of December 31, 2015 has been derived from our audited financial statements as of that date. For further information, refer to our financial statements and notes thereto included in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 . Reclassifications Certain amounts reported as of December 31, 2015 have been reclassified in order to conform to the 2016 presentation, including the retrospective adoption of certain amendments to the Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) effective January 1, 2016. The adoption of the amendments to ASC Subtopic 835-30, “Interest–Imputation of Interest,” resulted in the reclassification of certain debt issuance costs from “deferred charges and other assets, net” to “debt and capital lease obligations, less current portion.” The adoption of the amendments to ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes” resulted in the reclassification of current deferred income tax assets and current deferred income tax liabilities to noncurrent deferred income tax liabilities. The following table presents our previously reported balance sheet line items retrospectively adjusted for the adoption of these pronouncements (in millions): 5 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Significant Accounting Policies Use of Estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we review our estimates based on currently available information. Changes in facts and circumstances may result in revised estimates. Accounting Pronouncements Adopted During the Period In February 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 810, “Consolidation,” were amended to improve consolidation guidance for certain types of legal entities. The guidance modifies the evaluation of whether limited partnerships and similar legal entities are variable interest entities (VIEs) or voting interest entities, eliminates the presumption that a general partner should consolidate a limited partnership, affects the consolidation analysis of reporting entities that are involved with VIEs, particularly those that have fee arrangements and related party relationships. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods. With the adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016, we have determined that Valero Energy Partners LP (VLP) is a VIE. Since we previously consolidated the financial statements of VLP, the adoption of this guidance did not affect our financial position or results of operations. See Note 9 for disclosures related to our consolidated VIEs. In April 2015, the provisions of ASC Subtopic 835-30, “Interest–Imputation of Interest,” were amended to simplify the presentation of debt issuance costs. The guidance requires that debt issuance costs related to a note be reported in the balance sheet as a direct deduction from the face amount of that note, consistent with debt discounts, and that amortization of debt issuance costs be reported as interest expense. In August 2015, these provisions were further amended with guidance from the Securities and Exchange Commission staff, which provides that the staff would not object to an entity deferring and presenting debt issuance costs related to a line-of-credit arrangement as an asset and subsequently amortizing the deferred debt issuance costs ratably over the term of the line-of-credit arrangement, regardless of whether there are any outstanding borrowings on the line-of-credit arrangement. These provisions are to be applied retrospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 did not materially affect our financial position and did not affect our results of operations because we already reported the amortization of debt issuance costs as interest expense. See “Basis of Presentation–Reclassifications” above for the reclassified presentation in our balance sheet. Debt issuance costs associated with our line-of-credit arrangements will continue to be reported in the balance sheet as “deferred charges and other assets, net.” In May 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurements,” were amended to remove the requirement to categorize within the fair value hierarchy all investments for which fair value is measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient. The guidance also removes the requirement to make certain disclosures for all investments that are eligible to be measured using the net asset value per share practical expedient and limits those disclosures to investments for which the entity has elected to measure the fair value using that practical expedient. These provisions are to be applied retrospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 did not affect our financial position or results of operations, but will result in revised annual disclosures related to the fair value presentation of 6 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) certain assets of our defined benefit pension plans for which fair value is measured using net asset value per share as a practical expedient. In accordance with the new guidance, these investments will no longer be categorized within the fair value hierarchy. Changes to prior period disclosures will be applied retrospectively in accordance with the guidance. In September 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 805, “Business Combinations,” were amended to simplify the accounting and reporting of adjustments made to provisional amounts recognized in a business combination. The amendment requires that an acquirer (i) record, in the same period’s financial statements, the effect on earnings of changes in depreciation, amortization, or other income effects, if any, as a result of the change to the provisional amounts, calculated as if the accounting had been completed at the acquisition date and (ii) present separately on the statement of income or disclose in the notes the portion of the amount recorded in current-period earnings by line item that would have been recorded in previous reporting periods if the adjustment to the provisional amounts had been recognized as of the acquisition date. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2015, and interim periods within those annual periods, and should be applied prospectively to adjustments made to provisional amounts that occur after the effective date. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2016 did not affect our financial position or results of operations; however, it may result in changes to the manner in which adjustments to provisional amounts recognized in a future business combination, if any, are presented in our financial statements. In November 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes,” were amended to simplify the presentation of deferred income taxes. The amendments require that deferred tax liabilities and assets be classified as noncurrent in a classified balance sheet. The amendments are effective for financial statements for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted as of the beginning of any interim or annual period. The amendments may be applied either prospectively to all deferred tax liabilities and assets or retrospectively to all periods presented. Entities applying the guidance retrospectively should disclose in the first interim and first annual period of adoption the nature of and reason for the change in accounting principle and quantitative information about the effects of the accounting change on prior periods. Effective January 1, 2016, we adopted this guidance on a retrospective basis, but such adoption did not materially affect our financial position and it did not impact our results of operations. Upon adoption, our current deferred income tax assets of $74 million and current deferred income tax liabilities of $366 million as of December 31, 2015 were reclassified to noncurrent deferred income tax liabilities. See “Basis of Presentation–Reclassifications” above for the reclassified presentation. Adoption of this guidance simplifies the future presentation of our deferred income tax assets and liabilities. In March 2016, the provisions of ASC Topic 718, “Compensation–Stock Compensation,” were amended to simplify the accounting and reporting for employee share-based payments. These amendments involve several aspects of the accounting for share-based payment transactions, including accounting for income taxes as it pertains to the recognition of excess tax benefits and tax deficiencies in the statements of income, forfeitures, minimum statutory tax withholding requirements, as well as classification of excess tax benefits and employee taxes paid in the statement of cash flows. These provisions are effective for public companies for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. An entity that elects early adoption must adopt all of the amendments in the same period. The amendments provide specific transition and disclosure guidance for each provision. 7 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Effective January 1, 2016, we adopted this guidance on a prospective basis, and such adoption did not materially affect our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. Excess tax benefits, which were previously reported in cash flows from financing activities, are currently reported in cash flows from operating activities. Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted In May 2014, the ASC was amended and a new accounting standard, ASC Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” was issued to clarify the principles for recognizing revenue. The standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, including interim reporting periods within those annual periods. We are currently evaluating the effect that adopting this standard will have on our financial statements and related disclosures. In July 2015, the provisions of ASC Topic 330, “Inventory” were amended to simplify the measurement of inventory measured using the first-in, first-out or average cost methods. These provisions are to be applied prospectively and are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2016, and interim periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of this guidance effective January 1, 2017 will not affect our financial position or results of operations. In January 2016, the provisions of ASC Subtopic 825-10, “Financial Instruments–Overall,” were amended to enhance the reporting model for financial instruments regarding certain aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation, and disclosure. These provisions are effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017, and interim periods within those annual periods. We are currently evaluating the effect that adopting this standard will have on our financial statements and related disclosures. In February 2016, the ASC was amended and a new accounting standard, ASC Topic 842, “Leases,” was issued to increase the transparency and comparability among organizations by recognizing lease assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet and disclosing key information about leasing arrangements. The new standard is effective for public companies for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim reporting periods within those annual periods, with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating the effect that adopting this standard will have on our financial statements and related disclosures. 8 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) In 2012, we suspended the operations of the Aruba Refinery and reorganized the associated crude oil and refined products terminal assets into a terminaling and transshipment facility (collectively, the Aruba Terminal), which we continue to operate. We also wrote off all of the carrying value of the refining assets at that time because we determined they had no value after considering estimated salvage costs, and in 2014, we formally abandoned those refining assets. (We now refer to those refining assets as the Aruba Refinery.) Since that time, we have been in negotiations with the Government of Aruba (GOA) to settle our obligations under various agreements, including agreements that require us to dismantle our leasehold improvements under certain conditions. In June 2016, the GOA entered into definitive agreements with an unrelated third party that provide for such third party to lease the Aruba Refinery and Aruba Terminal from the GOA, restart and operate the Aruba Refinery, and operate the Aruba Terminal. Because of this development, we now believe that it is more likely than not that we will ultimately transfer ownership of the Aruba Refinery and Aruba Terminal to the GOA and settle the obligations mentioned above. Therefore, we evaluated the Aruba Terminal for potential impairment as of June 30, 2016 and concluded that it was impaired, resulting in an asset impairment loss of $56 million related to our refining segment. See Note 12 for disclosure related to the method to determine fair value. No income tax benefit was recorded for this asset impairment loss as we do not expect to realize a tax benefit. We are continuing to negotiate with the GOA regarding the matters discussed above and with the unrelated third party, but the resolution of those matters is not yet known. In addition, a negotiated resolution, if reached, must ultimately be voted on and approved by the Aruba Parliament. Inventories consisted of the following (in millions): Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market. As of December 31, 2015 , we had a valuation reserve of $766 million in order to state our inventories at market. As of June 30, 2016 , we reevaluated our inventories and determined that our cost was lower than market. As a result, for the six months ended June 30, 2016 , we recorded a change in our lower of cost or market inventory valuation reserve that resulted in a net benefit to our results of operations of $747 million . The income statement benefit for the six months ended June 30, 9 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) 2016 differs from the change in the balance sheet reserve due to the foreign currency effect of inventories held by our international operations. As of June 30, 2016 , the replacement cost (market value) of last-in, first-out (LIFO) inventories exceeded their LIFO carrying amounts by $713 million . As of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 , our non-LIFO inventories accounted for $681 million and $668 million , respectively, of our total inventories. Credit Facilities Revolver We have a $3 billion revolving credit facility (the Revolver) that matures in November 2020 . We have the option to increase the aggregate commitments under the Revolver to $4.5 billion , subject to certain conditions. The Revolver also provides for the issuance of letters of credit of up to $2.0 billion . No amounts were outstanding under the Revolver as of June 30, 2016 or December 31, 2015 , and we had no borrowings under the Revolver during the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 . VLP Revolver VLP has a $750 million senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the VLP Revolver) that matures in November 2020 . The VLP Revolver is available only to the operations of VLP, and creditors of VLP do not have recourse against Valero. VLP has the option to increase the aggregate commitments under the VLP Revolver to $1.0 billion , subject to certain conditions. The VLP Revolver also provides for the issuance of letters of credit of up to $100 million . Outstanding borrowings under the VLP Revolver bear interest at a variable rate, which was 1.75 percent as of June 30, 2016 . During the six months ended June 30, 2016 , VLP borrowed $139 million under the VLP Revolver in connection with VLP’s acquisition of the McKee Terminal Services Business from us in April 2016 . During the six months ended June 30, 2015 , VLP borrowed $200 million under the VLP Revolver in connection with VLP’s acquisition of the Houston and St. Charles Terminal Services Business from us. During the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 , VLP made no repayments under the VLP Revolver. Canadian Revolver One of our Canadian subsidiaries has a C$50 million committed revolving credit facility (the Canadian Revolver) that matures in November 2016 . No amounts were outstanding under the Canadian Revolver as of June 30, 2016 or December 31, 2015 , and we had no borrowings under the Canadian Revolver during the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 . Accounts Receivable Sales Facility We have an accounts receivable sales facility with a group of third-party entities and financial institutions to sell eligible trade receivables on a revolving basis. In July 2016, we amended our agreement to decrease the facility from $1.4 billion to $1.3 billion and extended the maturity date to July 2017 . Proceeds from the sale of receivables under this facility are reflected as debt. Under this program, one of our marketing subsidiaries (Valero Marketing) sells eligible receivables, without recourse, to another of our subsidiaries (Valero Capital), whereupon the receivables are no longer owned by Valero Marketing. Valero Capital, in turn, sells an undivided percentage ownership interest in the eligible receivables, without recourse, to the 10 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) third-party entities and financial institutions. To the extent that Valero Capital retains an ownership interest in the receivables it has purchased from Valero Marketing, such interest is included in our financial statements solely as a result of the consolidation of the financial statements of Valero Capital with those of Valero Energy Corporation; the receivables are not available to satisfy the claims of the creditors of Valero Marketing or Valero Energy Corporation. During the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 , we had no proceeds from or repayments under the accounts receivable sales facility. Summary of Credit Facilities We had outstanding borrowings, letters of credit issued, and availability under our revolving credit facilities as follows (in millions): ___________________ Non-Bank Debt During the six months ended June 30, 2016 , we had no borrowings or repayments under our non-bank debt. During the six months ended June 30, 2015 , we issued $600 million of 3.65 percent senior notes due March 15, 2025 and $650 million of 4.9 percent senior notes due March 15, 2045 . Proceeds from these debt issuances totaled $1.246 billion . We also incurred $12 million of debt issuance costs. During the six months ended June 30, 2015 , we made scheduled debt repayments of $400 million related to our 4.5 percent senior notes and $75 million related to our 8.75 percent debentures. 11 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Other Debt In June 2016, a joint venture in Canada that we consolidate entered into a C$72 million senior secured credit facility. This non-revolving credit facility bears interest at a fixed rate (as defined by the lender) plus the applicable margin and matures in June 2023 . Borrowings under this facility totaled C$72 million for the six months ended June 30, 2016. As of June 30, 2016, the effective interest rate of this facility was 3.85 percent. Capitalized Interest Capitalized interest was $19 million and $16 million for the three months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 , respectively, and $39 million and $32 million for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Environmental Matters We are involved, together with several other companies, in an environmental cleanup in the Village of Hartford, Illinois (the Village) and during 2015, one of these companies assumed the ongoing remediation in the Village pursuant to a federal court order. We had previously conducted an initial response in the Village, along with other companies, pursuant to an administrative order issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The parties involved in the initial response may have further claims between themselves for costs already incurred. We also continue to be engaged in site assessment and interim measures at the adjacent shutdown refinery site, which we acquired as part of an acquisition in 2005, and we are in litigation with other potentially responsible parties and the Illinois EPA relating to the remediation of the site. In each of these matters, we have various defenses and rights for contribution from the other responsible parties. We have recorded a liability for our own expected contribution obligations. However, because of the unpredictable nature of these cleanups, the methodology for allocation of liabilities, and the state of Illinois’ failure to directly sue third parties responsible for historic contamination at the site, it is reasonably possible that we could incur a loss in a range of $0 to $200 million in excess of the amount of our accrual to ultimately resolve these matters. Factors underlying this estimated range are expected to change from time to time, and actual results may vary significantly from this estimate. Litigation Matters We are party to claims and legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. We have not recorded a loss contingency liability with respect to some of these matters because we have determined that it is remote that a loss has been incurred. For other matters, we have recorded a loss contingency liability where we have determined that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and that the loss is reasonably estimable. These loss contingency liabilities are not material to our financial position. We re-evaluate and update our loss contingency liabilities as matters progress over time, and we believe that any changes to the recorded liabilities will not be material to our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. 12 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Reconciliation of Balances The following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of equity attributable to our stockholders, equity attributable to noncontrolling interests, and total equity (in millions): The noncontrolling interests relate to third-party ownership interests in VIEs for which we are the primary beneficiary and therefore consolidate. See Note 9 for information about our consolidated VIEs. 13 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Share Activity Activity in the number of shares of common stock and treasury stock was as follows (in millions): Treasury Stock We purchase shares of our common stock as authorized under our common stock purchase program and to meet our obligations under employee stock-based compensation plans. Common Stock Dividends On July 28, 2016 , our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.60 per common share payable on September 8, 2016 to holders of record at the close of business on August 11, 2016 . Income Tax Effects Related to Components of Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) The tax effects allocated to each component of other comprehensive income (loss) were as follows (in millions): 14 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss by component, net of tax, were as follows (in millions): 15 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The components of net periodic benefit cost related to our defined benefit plans were as follows (in millions): Our anticipated contributions to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans during 2016 have not changed from amounts previously disclosed in our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2015 . We contributed $14 million and $21 million , respectively, to our pension plans and $8 million and $6 million , respectively, to our other postretirement benefit plans during the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 . 16 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Earnings per common share were computed as follows (dollars and shares in millions, except per share amounts): 17 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Participating securities include restricted stock and performance awards granted under our 2011 Omnibus Stock Incentive Plan. 18 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) In the normal course of business, we have financial interests in certain entities that have been determined to be VIEs. We consolidate a VIE when we have a variable interest in an entity for which we are the primary beneficiary such that we have (a) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (b) the obligation to absorb losses of or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. In order to make this determination, we evaluated our contractual arrangements with the VIEs, including arrangements for the use of assets, purchases of products and services, debt, equity, or management of operating activities. The following discussion summarizes our involvement with our VIEs: VLP was determined to be a VIE because the public limited partners of VLP ( i.e. , parties other than entities under common control with the general partner) lack the power to direct the activities of VLP that most significantly impact its economic performance because they do not have substantive kick-out rights over the general partner or substantive participating rights in VLP. Furthermore, we determined that we are the primary beneficiary of VLP because (a) we are the single decision maker and because our general partner interest provides us with the sole power to direct the activities that most significantly impact VLP’s economic performance and (b) our 66.1 percent limited partner interest and 2 percent general partner interest provide us with significant economic rights and obligations. All of VLP’s revenues are derived from us; therefore, there is limited risk to us associated with VLP’s operations. In the event of certain conditions, the debt agreement provides us (as lender) with certain power to direct the activities that most significantly impact DGD’s economic performance. Because the loan agreement conveys such power to us and is separate from our ownership rights, DGD was determined to be a VIE. For this reason and because we hold a 50 percent ownership interest that provides us with significant economic rights and obligations, we determined that we are the primary beneficiary 19 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) of DGD. DGD has risk associated with its operations because it generates revenues from third-party customers. The VIEs’ assets can only be used to settle their own obligations and the VIEs’ creditors have no recourse to our assets. We do not provide financial guarantees to our VIEs. Although we have provided credit facilities to the VIEs in support of their construction or acquisition activities, these transactions are eliminated in consolidation. Our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows are impacted by our consolidated VIEs’ performance, net of intercompany eliminations, to the extent of our ownership interest in each VIE. The following tables present summarized balance sheet information for the significant assets and liabilities of our VIEs, which are included in our balance sheets (in millions). 20 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) 21 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) The following table reflects activity related to our reportable segments (in millions): 22 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Total assets by reportable segment were as follows (in millions): In order to determine net cash provided by operating activities, net income is adjusted by, among other things, changes in current assets and current liabilities as follows (in millions): The above changes in current assets and current liabilities differ from changes between amounts reflected in the applicable balance sheets for the respective periods for the following reasons: 23 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) There were no significant noncash investing and financing activities for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 . Cash flows reflected as “other financing activities, net” for the six months ended June 30, 2016 included the payoff of a long-term liability of $137 million owed to a joint venture partner associated with an owner-method joint venture investment. Cash flows related to interest and income taxes were as follows (in millions): General U.S. GAAP requires or permits certain assets and liabilities to be measured at fair value on a recurring or nonrecurring basis in our balance sheets, and those assets and liabilities are presented below under “Recurring Fair Value Measurements” and “Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements.” Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis, such as derivative financial instruments, are measured at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis, such as the impairment of property, plant and equipment, are measured at fair value in particular circumstances. U.S. GAAP also requires the disclosure of the fair values of financial instruments when an option to elect fair value accounting has been provided, but such election has not been made. A debt obligation is an example of such a financial instrument. The disclosure of the fair values of financial instruments not recognized at fair value in our balance sheet is presented below under “Other Financial Instruments.” U.S. GAAP provides a framework for measuring fair value and establishes a three-level fair value hierarchy that prioritizes inputs to valuation techniques based on the degree to which objective prices in external active markets are available to measure fair value. Following is a description of each of the levels of the fair value hierarchy. 24 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) occasional market quotes or sales of similar instruments or our own financial data such as internally developed pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies, as well as instruments for which the fair value determination requires significant judgment. Recurring Fair Value Measurements The tables below present information (in millions) about our assets and liabilities recognized at their fair values in our balance sheets categorized according to the fair value hierarchy of the inputs utilized by us to determine the fair values as of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 . We have elected to offset the fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty, including any related cash collateral assets or obligations as shown below; however, fair value amounts by hierarchy level are presented in the tables below on a gross basis. We have no derivative contracts that are subject to master netting arrangements that are reflected gross on the balance sheet. 25 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) A description of our assets and liabilities recognized at fair value along with the valuation methods and inputs we used to develop their fair value measurements are as follows: 26 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) There were no transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 for assets and liabilities held as of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 that were measured at fair value on a recurring basis. There was no activity during the three and six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 related to the fair value amounts categorized in Level 3 as of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 . Nonrecurring Fair Value Measurements As discussed in Note 2 , we concluded that the Aruba Terminal was impaired as of June 30, 2016 , which resulted in an asset impairment loss of $56 million that was recorded in June 2016. The fair value of the Aruba Terminal was determined using an income approach and is classified in Level 3. We employed a probability-weighted approach to possible future cash flow scenarios, including transferring ownership of the business to the GOA or continuing to operate. There were no liabilities that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of June 30, 2016 . There were no assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis as of December 31, 2015 . 27 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Other Financial Instruments Financial instruments that we recognize in our balance sheets at their carrying amounts are shown in the table below along with their associated fair values (in millions): The methods and significant assumptions used to estimate the fair value of these financial instruments are as follows: 28 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) We are exposed to market risks primarily related to the volatility in the price of commodities, foreign currency exchange rates, and the price of credits needed to comply with various government and regulatory programs. We enter into derivative instruments to manage some of these risks, including derivative instruments related to the various commodities we purchase or produce, and foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts, as described below under “Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk.” These derivative instruments are recorded as either assets or liabilities measured at their fair values (see Note 12 ), as summarized below under “Fair Values of Derivative Instruments,” with changes in fair value recognized currently in income, except for derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges whose changes in fair value are recognized in income in the period in which the hedged forecasted transactions affect income. The effect of these derivative instruments on our income is summarized below under “Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income.” The cash flow effects of all of our derivative instruments are reflected in operating activities in our statements of cash flows for all periods presented. Risk Management Activities by Type of Risk Commodity Price Risk We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including futures, swaps, and options. We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our hedging and trading operations. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. To manage commodity price risk, we use economic hedges, which are not designated as fair value or cash flow hedges, and we use fair value and cash flow hedges from time to time. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes. Our objectives for entering into hedges or trading derivatives are described below. As of June 30, 2016 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were used as economic hedges, as well as commodity derivative instruments related to the physical purchase of corn at a fixed price. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes in thousands of barrels, except those identified as natural gas 29 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) contracts that are presented in billions of British thermal units, corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels and soybean oil contracts that are presented in thousands of pounds). 30 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) As of June 30, 2016 , we had the following outstanding commodity derivative instruments that were entered into for trading purposes. The information presents the notional volume of outstanding contracts by type of instrument and year of maturity (volumes represent thousands of barrels, except those identified as natural gas contracts that are presented in billions of British thermal units and corn contracts that are presented in thousands of bushels). We had no commodity derivative contracts outstanding as of June 30, 2016 and 2015 or during the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 that were designated as fair value or cash flow hedges. Foreign Currency Risk We are exposed to exchange rate fluctuations on transactions entered into by our international operations that are denominated in currencies other than the local (functional) currencies of those operations. To manage our exposure to these exchange rate fluctuations, we use foreign currency exchange and purchase contracts. These contracts are not designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes and therefore are classified as economic hedges. As of June 30, 2016 , we had forward contracts to purchase $356 million of U.S. dollars. These contracts matured on or before July 31, 2016 . Environmental Compliance Program Price Risk We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory environmental compliance programs. To manage this risk, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. Certain of these programs require us to blend biofuels into the products we produce, and we are subject to such programs in most of the countries in which we operate. These countries set annual quotas for the percentage of biofuels that must be blended into the motor fuels consumed in these countries. As a producer of motor fuels from petroleum, we are obligated to blend biofuels into the products we produce at 31 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) a rate that is at least equal to the applicable quota. To the degree we are unable to blend at the applicable rate, we must purchase biofuel credits (primarily RINs in the U.S.). We are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits, and we manage that risk by purchasing biofuel credits when prices are deemed favorable. The cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was $173 million and $56 million for the three months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 , respectively, and $334 million and $189 million for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. These amounts are reflected in cost of sales. Effective January 1, 2015, we became subject to additional requirements under greenhouse gas emission programs, including the cap-and-trade systems, as discussed in Note 12 . Under these cap-and-trade systems, we purchase various greenhouse gas emission credits available on the open market. Therefore, we are exposed to the volatility in the market price of these credits. The cost to implement certain provisions of the cap-and-trade systems are significant; however, we recovered the majority of these costs from our customers for the six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 and expect to continue to recover the majority of these costs in the future. For the three and six months ended June 30, 2016 and 2015 , the net cost of meeting our obligations under these compliance programs was immaterial. Fair Values of Derivative Instruments The following tables provide information about the fair values of our derivative instruments as of June 30, 2016 and December 31, 2015 (in millions) and the line items in the balance sheets in which the fair values are reflected. See Note 12 for additional information related to the fair values of our derivative instruments. As indicated in Note 12 , we net fair value amounts recognized for multiple similar derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty under master netting arrangements, including cash collateral assets and obligations. The tables below, however, are presented on a gross asset and gross liability basis, which results in the reflection of certain assets in liability accounts and certain liabilities in asset accounts. 32 Table of Contents VALERO ENERGY CORPORATION CONDENSED NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Continued) Market and Counterparty Risk Our price risk management activities involve the receipt or payment of fixed price commitments into the future. These transactions give rise to market risk, which is the risk that future changes in market conditions may make an instrument less valuable. We closely monitor and manage our exposure to market risk on a daily basis in accordance with policies approved by our board of directors. Market risks are monitored by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy. We do not require any collateral or other security to support derivative instruments into which we enter. We also do not have any derivative instruments that require us to maintain a minimum investment-grade credit rating. Effect of Derivative Instruments on Income The following tables provide information about the gain or loss recognized in income on our derivative instruments and the income statement line items in which such gains and losses are reflected (in millions). 33 Table of Contents CAUTIONARY STATEMENT FOR THE PURPOSE OF SAFE HARBOR PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995 This Form 10-Q, including without limitation our disclosures below under the heading “OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK , ” includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. You can identify our forward-looking statements by the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “expect,” “plan,” “intend,” “estimate,” “project,” “projection,” “predict,” “budget,” “forecast,” “goal,” “guidance,” “target,” “could,” “should,” “may,” and similar expressions. These forward-looking statements include, among other things, statements regarding: We based our forward-looking statements on our current expectations, estimates, and projections about ourselves and our industry. We caution that these statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that we cannot predict. In addition, we based many of these forward-looking statements on assumptions about future events that may prove to be inaccurate. Accordingly, our actual results may differ materially from the future performance that we have expressed or forecast in the forward-looking statements. Differences between actual results and any future performance suggested in these forward-looking statements could result from a variety of factors, including the following: 34 Table of Contents Any one of these factors, or a combination of these factors, could materially affect our future results of operations and whether any forward-looking statements ultimately prove to be accurate. Our forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and actual results and future performance may differ materially from those suggested in any forward-looking statements. We do not intend to update these statements unless we are required by the securities laws to do so. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the foregoing. We undertake no obligation to publicly release any revisions to any such forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. This Form 10-Q includes references to financial measures that are not defined under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). These non-GAAP financial measures include adjusted net income attributable to Valero Energy Corporation stockholders, adjusted earnings per common share –assuming dilution, adjusted operating income, and gross margin. We have included these non-GAAP financial measures to help facilitate the comparison of operating results between periods. See the accompanying financial tables in “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for a reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures. In note (c) to the accompanying tables, we disclose the reasons why we believe our use of the non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information. 35 Table of Contents OVERVIEW AND OUTLOOK Overview Second Quarter Results In the second quarter of 2016 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders of $814 million , or $1.73 per share (assuming dilution), compared to $1.4 billion , or $2.66 per share (assuming dilution), in the second quarter of 2015 , which represents a decrease of $537 million . However, adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders in the second quarter of 2016 of $503 million , or $1.07 per share (assuming dilution), decreased by $848 million from the comparable 2015 period. Our results for the second quarter of 2016 include a noncash benefit of $454 million from a lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment, of which $434 million was attributable to our refining segment and $20 million was attributable to our ethanol segment. This benefit less related tax expense of $87 million resulted in an after-tax benefit of $367 million , or $0.78 per share (assuming dilution). In addition, our results for the second quarter of 2016 include a noncash charge of $56 million , or $0.12 per share (assuming dilution), from an asset impairment loss related to our Aruba Terminal, which was attributable to our refining segment. These matters are more fully described in Notes 3 and 2 , respectively, of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. These items are excluded from our actual results to determine the adjusted amounts. The decrease of $537 million in net income attributable to Valero stockholders and the decrease of $848 million in adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders in the second quarter of 2016 from the second quarter of 2015 were due to decreases in our operating income and adjusted operating income, respectively. Our second quarter 2016 operating income decreased $847 million from the second quarter of 2015 as outlined by segment in the following table (in millions). Our adjusted operating income, however, decreased by $1.2 billion as outlined by segment in the table below (in millions). The $1.2 billion decrease in refining segment adjusted operating income was due primarily to lower margins on refined products and lower discounts on light sweet crude oils relative to Brent crude oil. Our ethanol segment adjusted operating income decreased $59 million due primarily to lower ethanol margins that resulted from higher corn prices and lower co-product prices. 36 Table of Contents First Six Months Results For the first six months of 2016 , we reported net income attributable to Valero stockholders of $1.3 billion , or $2.78 per share (assuming dilution), compared to $2.3 billion , or $4.52 per share (assuming dilution), for the first six months of 2015 , which represents a decrease of $1.0 billion . However, adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders for the first six months of 2016 of $786 million , or $1.67 per share (assuming dilution), decreased by $1.5 billion from the comparable 2015 period. Our results for the first six months of 2016 include a noncash benefit of $747 million from a lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment, of which $697 million was attributable to our refining segment and $50 million was attributable to our ethanol segment. This benefit less related tax expense of $168 million resulted in an after-tax benefit of $579 million , or $1.23 per share (assuming dilution). In addition, our results for the first six months of 2016 include a noncash charge of $56 million , or $0.12 per share (assuming dilution), from an asset impairment loss related to our Aruba Terminal, which was attributable to our refining segment. These matters are more fully described in Notes 3 and 2 , respectively, of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. These items are excluded from our actual results to determine the adjusted amounts. The decrease of $1.0 billion in net income attributable to Valero stockholders and the decrease of $1.5 billion in adjusted net income attributable to Valero stockholders in the first six months of 2016 from the first six months of 2015 were due to decreases in our operating income and adjusted operating income, respectively. Our first six months of 2016 operating income decreased $1.5 billion from the first six months of 2015 as outlined by segment in the following table (in millions). Our adjusted operating income, however, decreased by $2.2 billion as outlined by segment in the table below (in millions). The $2.2 billion decrease in refining segment adjusted operating income was due primarily to lower margins on refined products and lower discounts on light sweet crude oils relative to Brent crude oil. Our ethanol segment adjusted operating income decreased $62 million due primarily to lower ethanol margins that resulted from lower ethanol prices and lower co-product prices. Additional Information and non-GAAP Reconciliations Additional details and analysis of the changes in the operating income and adjusted operating income of our business segments and other components of net income and adjusted net income attributable to Valero 37 Table of Contents stockholders, including a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures used in this Overview to their most comparable amounts reported under U.S. GAAP, are provided below under “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.” Outlook Energy markets and margins were volatile during the second quarter of 2016, and we expect them to continue to be volatile during the remainder of 2016. Below is a summary of factors that have impacted or may impact our results of operations during the third quarter of 2016: 38 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following tables highlight our results of operations, our operating performance, and market prices that directly impact our operations. In addition, these tables include financial measures that are not defined under U.S. GAAP and represent non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are reconciled to their most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures and include adjusted net income attributable to Valero Energy Corporation stockholders, adjusted earnings per common share – assuming dilution, adjusted operating income, and gross margin. In note (c) to these tables, we disclose the reasons why we believe our use of the non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information. The narrative following these tables provides an analysis of our results of operations. Financial Highlights (millions of dollars, except share and per share amounts) ________________ See note references on page 62 . 39 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) ________________ See note references on page 62 . 40 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on page 62 . 41 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on page 62 . 42 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on page 62 . 43 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 62 . 44 Table of Contents Ethanol Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) _______________ See note references on page 62 . 45 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 62 . 46 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 62 . 47 Table of Contents Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) _______________ See note references on page 62 . 48 Table of Contents General Operating revenues decreased $5.5 billion (or 22 percent) and cost of sales decreased $4.3 billion (or 20 percent) in the second quarter of 2016 compared to the second quarter of 2015 primarily due to a decrease in refined product prices and crude oil feedstock costs, respectively. Operating income decreased $847 million in the second quarter of 2016 compared to the second quarter of 2015 , with refining segment operating income decreasing by $829 million and ethanol segment operating income decreasing by $39 million . Adjusted operating income decreased $1.2 billion in the second quarter of 2016 compared to the second quarter of 2015 , with refining segment adjusted operating income decreasing $1.2 billion and ethanol segment adjusted operating income decreasing $59 million . The reasons for these changes in the adjusted operating results of our segments, as well as other items that affected our income, are discussed below. Refining Refining segment adjusted operating income decreased $1.2 billion for the second quarter of 2016 compared to the second quarter of 2015 primarily due to a $1.2 billion decrease in refining gross margin and a $33 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense, offset by a $33 million decrease in operating expenses. Refining gross margin decreased $1.2 billion (a $4.78 per barrel decrease) for the second quarter of 2016 compared to the second quarter of 2015 , due primarily to the following: 49 Table of Contents crude oils in the second quarter of 2016 had an unfavorable impact to our refining margin of approximately $330 million. The decrease of $33 million in operating expenses was primarily due to a $26 million decrease in energy costs driven by lower natural gas prices ( $2.08 per MMBtu in the second quarter of 2016 compared to $2.69 per MMBtu in the second quarter of 2015 ). The increase of $33 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to an increase of $14 million in depreciation expense associated with new capital projects and $9 million in refinery turnaround and catalyst amortization expense resulting from the completion of turnaround projects at several of our refineries. Ethanol Ethanol segment adjusted operating income decreased $59 million for the second quarter of 2016 compared to the second quarter of 2015 primarily due to a $53 million (or $0.16 per gallon) decrease in gross margin, partially offset by a $9 million decrease in operating expenses. The decrease in ethanol segment gross margin of $53 million was due primarily to the following: The $9 million decrease in operating expenses was primarily due to a $6 million decrease in energy costs related to lower natural gas prices ( $2.08 per MMBtu in the second quarter of 2016 compared to $2.69 per MMBtu in the second quarter of 2015 ). The increase of $15 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due a $10 million gain on sale of certain plant assets in the second quarter of 2015 that was reflected in depreciation and amortization expense thereby reducing depreciation and amortization expense in that quarter. 50 Table of Contents Other We evaluated the Aruba Terminal for potential impairment as of June 30, 2016 and concluded that it was impaired, resulting in an asset impairment loss of $56 million related to our refining segment. This matter is more fully described in Note 2 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Income tax expense decreased $317 million from the second quarter of 2015 to the second quarter of 2016 primarily as a result of lower income before income tax expense. The effective tax rates of 26 percent in the second quarter of 2016 and 31 percent in the second quarter of 2015 are lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 35 percent because income from our international operations is taxed at statutory rates that are lower than in the U.S. The effective tax rate in the second quarter of 2016 was lower than the rate in the second quarter of 2015 primarily due to the impact from the reversal of the lower of cost or market inventory valuation reserve of $454 million in the second quarter of 2016 . The majority of that amount impacted our international operations, which increased the amount of income before income tax expense generated by our operations with lower statutory tax rates. 51 Table of Contents Financial Highlights (millions of dollars, except share and per share amounts) ________________ See note references on page 62 . 52 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars, except per share amounts) ________________ See note references on page 62 . 53 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on page 62 . 54 Table of Contents Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on page 62 . 55 Table of Contents Reconciliation of  of Non-GAAP Measures to Most Comparable Amounts Reported under U.S. GAAP (c) (millions of dollars) ________________ See note references on page 62 . 56 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 62 . 57 Table of Contents Ethanol Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per gallon amounts) _______________ See note references on page 62 . 58 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 62 . 59 Table of Contents Refining Segment Operating Highlights (millions of dollars, except per barrel amounts) _______________ See note references on page 62 . 60 Table of Contents Average Market Reference Prices and Differentials (dollars per barrel, except as noted) _______________ See note references on page 62 . 61 Table of Contents The following notes relate to references on pages 39 through 48 and pages 52 through 61 . These terms are not defined under U.S. GAAP and are considered non-GAAP measures. Management has defined these terms and believes that the presentation of the associated measures are useful to external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders, and rating agencies, to assess our ongoing financial performance that, when reconciled to their most comparable U.S. GAAP measures, provide improved comparability between periods through the exclusion of certain items that management believes are not indicative of our core operating performance and that may obscure underlying business results and trends. Adjusted net income attributable to Valero Energy Corporation stockholders, adjusted earnings per common share – assuming dilution, gross margin, and adjusted operating income should not be considered as alternatives to net income attributable to Valero Energy Corporation stockholders, earnings per common share – assuming dilution, or operating income presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results of operations as reported under U.S. GAAP. Additionally, because adjusted net income attributable to Valero Energy Corporation stockholders, adjusted earnings per common share – assuming dilution, gross margin, and adjusted operating income may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definitions of these terms may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, thereby diminishing their utility. 62 Table of Contents General Operating revenues decreased $11.2 billion (or 24 percent) and cost of sales decreased $8.9 billion (or 23 percent) in the first six months of 2016 compared to the first six months of 2015 primarily due to a decrease in refined product prices and crude oil feedstock costs, respectively. Operating income decreased $1.5 billion in the first six months of 2016 compared to the first six months of 2015 , with refining segment operating income decreasing by $1.5 billion and ethanol segment operating income decreasing by $12 million . Adjusted operating income decreased $2.2 billion in the first six months of 2016 compared to the first six months of 2015 , with refining segment adjusted operating income decreasing $2.2 billion and ethanol segment adjusted operating income decreasing $62 million . The reasons for these changes in the operating results of our segments, as well as other items that affected our income, are discussed below. Refining Refining segment adjusted operating income decreased $2.2 billion in the first six months of 2016 compared to the first six months of 2015 primarily due to a $2.1 billion decrease in refining gross margin and a $77 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense, partially offset by a $66 million decrease in operating expenses. Refining gross margin decreased $2.1 billion (a $4.63 per barrel decrease) in the first six months of 2016 compared to the first six months of 2015 , due primarily to the following: 63 Table of Contents the first six months of 2016 compared to $14.58 per barrel for the first six months of 2015 , representing an unfavorable decrease of $ 5.88 per barrel. Another example is the WTI-based benchmark reference margin for U.S. Mid-Continent ultra-low-sulfur diesel that was $11.38 per barrel for the first six months of 2016 compared to $20.36 per barrel for the first six months of 2015 , representing an unfavorable decrease of $8.98 per barrel. We estimate that the decrease in distillate margins per barrel in the first six months of 2016 compared to the first six months of 2015 had an unfavorable impact to our refining margin of approximately $1.3 billion. The decrease of $66 million in operating expenses was primarily due to a $52 million decrease in energy costs driven by lower natural gas prices ( $2.01 per MMBtu for the first six months of 2016 compared to $2.73 per MMBtu for the first six months of 2015 ). 64 Table of Contents The increase of $77 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to an increase of $31 million in depreciation expense associated with new capital projects and $28 million in refinery turnaround and catalyst amortization expense resulting from the completion of turnaround projects at several of our refineries. Ethanol Ethanol segment adjusted operating income decreased $62 million primarily due to a $78 million (or $0.11 per gallon) decrease in gross margin and a $14 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense, partially offset by a $30 million decrease in operating expenses. The decrease in ethanol segment gross margin of $78 million was due primarily to the following: The $30 million decrease in operating expenses was primarily due to a $20 million decrease in energy costs related to lower natural gas prices ( $2.01 per MMBtu for the first six months of 2016 compared to $2.73 per MMBtu for the first six months of 2015 ). The increase of $14 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due a $10 million gain on sale of certain plant assets in the first six months of 2015 that was reflected in depreciation and amortization expense thereby reducing depreciation and amortization expense in that period combined with an increase of $7 million in depreciation expense associated with new capital projects. Other We evaluated the Aruba Terminal for potential impairment as of June 30, 2016 and concluded that it was impaired, resulting in an asset impairment loss of $56 million related to our refining segment. This matter is more fully described in Note 2 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Income tax expense decreased $550 million from the first six months of 2015 to the first six months of 2016 primarily as a result of lower income before income tax expense. The effective tax rates of 27 percent in the first six months of 2016 and 31 percent in the first six months of 2015 are lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 35 percent because income from our international operations is taxed at statutory rates that are lower than in the U.S. The effective tax rate in the first six months of 2016 was lower than the rate in the first six months of 2015 primarily due to the impact from the reversal of the lower of cost or market inventory valuation reserve of $747 million in the first six months of 2016 . The majority of that amount impacted our international operations, which increased the amount of income before income tax expense generated by our operations with lower statutory tax rates. 65 Table of Contents LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Cash Flows for the Six Months Ended June 30, 2016 Our operations generated $3.0 billion of cash in the first six months of 2016 , driven primarily by net income of $1.4 billion and excluding $460 million of noncash charges to income, along with a positive change in working capital of $1.1 billion . Noncash charges include $956 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $56 million for the asset impairment loss associated with our Aruba Terminal, and $195 million of deferred income tax expense, partially offset by a benefit of $747 million from a lower of cost or market inventory valuation adjustment. See “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for further discussion of our operations. The change in our working capital is further detailed in Note 11 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. This source of cash mainly resulted from: The $3.0 billion of cash generated by our operations, along with debt borrowings of $197 million (primarily $139 million under the VLP Revolver, as discussed in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), were used mainly to: Cash Flows for the Six Months Ended June 30, 2015 Our operations generated $3.8 billion of cash in the first six months of 2015 , driven primarily by net income of $2.3 billion and excluding $784 million of noncash charges to income. Noncash charges include $866 million of depreciation and amortization expense, partially offset by a deferred income tax benefit of $82 million . See “RESULTS OF OPERATIONS” for further discussion of our operations. The change in our working capital in the first six months of 2015 had a positive impact to cash generated by our operations of $615 million . This source of cash mainly resulted from an increase in accounts payable as a result of increased crude purchase activity during June 2015 compared to December 2014. The $3.8 billion of cash generated by our operations in the first six months of 2015 , along with $1.45 billion in proceeds from the issuance of debt ( $600 million of 3.65 percent senior notes due March 15, 2025 , $650 million of 4.9 percent senior notes due March 15, 2045 , and borrowings under the VLP Revolver of $200 million as discussed in Note 4 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements), were used mainly to: 66 Table of Contents Capital Investments For 2016, we expect to incur approximately $2.6 billion for capital investments, including capital expenditures, deferred turnaround and catalyst costs, and equity-method joint venture investments. This consists of approximately $1.6 billion for stay-in-business capital and $1.0 billion for growth strategies, including our continued investment in Diamond Pipeline LLC (Diamond Pipeline) described below. This capital investment estimate excludes potential strategic acquisitions. We continuously evaluate our capital budget and make changes as conditions warrant. We hold equity-method investments in joint ventures and we invest in these joint ventures or enter into new joint venture arrangements to enhance our operations. In December 2015, we exercised our option to purchase a 50 percent interest in Diamond Pipeline, which was formed by Plains Pipeline, L.P. (Plains) to construct and operate a 440-mile, 20-inch crude oil pipeline expected to provide capacity of up to 200,000 barrels per day of domestic sweet crude oil from the Plains Cushing, Oklahoma terminal to our Memphis Refinery, with the ability to connect into the Capline Pipeline. The pipeline is expected to be completed in 2017 for an estimated $925 million, pending receipt of necessary regulatory approvals. We contributed $136 million upon exercise of our option and expect to invest an additional $170 million in 2016. Contractual Obligations As of June 30, 2016 , our contractual obligations included debt, capital lease obligations, operating leases, purchase obligations, and other long-term liabilities. There were no material changes outside the ordinary course of business with respect to these contractual obligations during the six months ended June 30, 2016 . Currently, we have an accounts receivable sales facility with a group of third-party entities and financial institutions to sell eligible trade receivables on a revolving basis up to $1.3 billion . As of June 30, 2016 , the actual availability under the facility fell below the facility borrowing capacity to $1.2 billion primarily due to a decrease in eligible trade receivables as a result of the current market price environment for the finished products that we produce. Our debt and financing agreements do not have rating agency triggers that would automatically require us to post additional collateral. However, in the event of certain downgrades of our senior unsecured debt by the ratings agencies, the cost of borrowings under some of our bank credit facilities and other arrangements would increase. All of the ratings on our senior unsecured debt are at or above investment grade level as follows: We cannot provide assurance that these ratings will remain in effect for any given period of time or that one or more of these ratings will not be lowered or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency. We note that these credit ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities and may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating agency. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Any future reduction below investment grade or withdrawal of one or more of our credit ratings could have a material adverse impact on our ability to obtain short- and long-term financing and the cost of such financings. 67 Table of Contents Summary of Credit Facilities As of June 30, 2016 , we had outstanding borrowings and letters of credit issued under our credit facilities as follows (in millions): In July 2016, we amended one of our committed letter of credit facilities to extend the maturity date from June 2016 to June 2017 . Letters of credit issued as of June 30, 2016 expire in 2016 through 2018. Other Matters Impacting Liquidity and Capital Resources Stock Purchase Program As of June 30, 2016 , we had approximately $692 million of our common stock remaining to be purchased under our $2.5 billion common stock purchase program, but we have no obligation to make purchases under this program. Pension Plan Funding We plan to contribute approximately $36 million to our pension plans and $20 million to our other postretirement benefit plans during 2016 . We contributed $14 million to our pension plans and $8 million to our other postretirement benefit plans during the six months ended June 30, 2016 . Environmental Matters Our operations are subject to extensive environmental regulations by governmental authorities relating to the discharge of materials into the environment, waste management, pollution prevention measures, GHG emissions, and characteristics and composition of gasolines and distillates. Because environmental laws and regulations are becoming more complex and stringent and new environmental laws and regulations are continuously being enacted or proposed, the level of future expenditures required for environmental matters could increase in the future as previously discussed above in “OUTLOOK.” In addition, any major upgrades in any of our operating facilities could require material additional expenditures to comply with environmental laws and regulations. See Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion of our environmental matters. Tax Matters The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has ongoing tax audits related to our U.S. federal tax returns from 2008 through 2011, and we have received Revenue Agent Reports (RARs) in connection with these audits. We are contesting certain tax positions and assertions included in the RARs and continue to make progress in 68 Table of Contents resolving certain of these matters with the IRS. We expect to settle our audit for tax years 2008 and 2009 within the next 12 months. In addition, our net uncertain tax position liabilities, including related penalties and interest, did not change significantly during the six months ended June 30, 2016 . Should we ultimately settle these audits for amounts consistent with our estimates, we believe that we will have sufficient cash on hand at that time to make such payments. Cash Held by Our International Subsidiaries We operate in countries outside the U.S. through subsidiaries incorporated in these countries, and the earnings of these subsidiaries are taxed by the countries in which they are incorporated. We intend to reinvest these earnings indefinitely in our international operations even though we are not restricted from repatriating such earnings to the U.S. in the form of cash dividends. Should we decide to repatriate such earnings, we would incur and pay taxes on the amounts repatriated. In addition, such repatriation could cause us to record deferred tax expense that could significantly impact our results of operations. We believe, however, that a substantial portion of our international cash can be returned to the U.S. without significant tax consequences through means other than a repatriation of earnings. As of June 30, 2016 , $2.0 billion of our cash and temporary cash investments was held by our international subsidiaries. Concentration of Customers Our operations have a concentration of customers in the refining industry and customers who are refined product wholesalers and retailers. These concentrations of customers may impact our overall exposure to credit risk, either positively or negatively, in that these customers may be similarly affected by changes in economic or other conditions. However, we believe that our portfolio of accounts receivable is sufficiently diversified to the extent necessary to minimize potential credit risk. Historically, we have not had any significant problems collecting our accounts receivable. Sources of Liquidity We believe that we have sufficient funds from operations and, to the extent necessary, from borrowings under our credit facilities, to fund our ongoing operating requirements. We expect that, to the extent necessary, we can raise additional funds from time to time through equity or debt financings in the public and private capital markets or the arrangement of additional credit facilities. However, there can be no assurances regarding the availability of any future financings or additional credit facilities or whether such financings or additional credit facilities can be made available on terms that are acceptable to us. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. As of June 30, 2016 , there were no significant changes to our critical accounting policies since the date our annual report on Form 10‑K for the year ended December 31, 2015 was filed. 69 Table of Contents COMMODITY PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risks related to the volatility in the price of crude oil, refined products (primarily gasoline and distillate), grain (primarily corn), soybean oil, and natural gas used in our operations. To reduce the impact of price volatility on our results of operations and cash flows, we use commodity derivative instruments, including swaps, futures, and options to manage the volatility of: We use the futures markets for the available liquidity, which provides greater flexibility in transacting our price risk activities. We use swaps primarily to manage our price exposure. We also enter into certain commodity derivative instruments for trading purposes to take advantage of existing market conditions related to future results of operations and cash flows. Our positions in commodity derivative instruments are monitored and managed on a daily basis by our risk control group to ensure compliance with our stated risk management policy that has been approved by our board of directors. The following sensitivity analysis includes all positions at the end of the reporting period with which we have market risk (in millions): See Note 13 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for notional volumes associated with these derivative contracts as of June 30, 2016 . 70 Table of Contents COMPLIANCE PROGRAM PRICE RISK We are exposed to market risk related to the volatility in the price of biofuel credits and GHG emission credits needed to comply with various governmental and regulatory programs. To manage these risks, we enter into contracts to purchase these credits when prices are deemed favorable. Some of these contracts are derivative instruments; however, we elect the normal purchase exception and do not record these contracts at their fair values. As of June 30, 2016 , there was an immaterial amount of gain or loss in the fair value of derivative instruments that would result from a 10 percent increase or decrease in the underlying price of the contracts. See Note 13 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion about these compliance programs. INTEREST RATE RISK The following table provides information about our debt instruments, the fair values of which are sensitive to changes in interest rates. Principal cash flows and related weighted-average interest rates by expected maturity dates are presented. FOREIGN CURRENCY RISK As of June 30, 2016 , we had commitments to purchase $356 million of U.S. dollars. Our market risk was minimal on these contracts, as all of them matured on or before July 31, 2016 . 71 Table of Contents Item 4. Controls and Procedures Our management has evaluated, with the participation of our principal executive officer and principal financial officer, the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in             Rule 13a-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) as of the end of the period covered by this report, and has concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of June 30, 2016 . There has been no change in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during our last fiscal quarter that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 72 Table of Contents PART II – OTHER INFORMATION The information below describes new proceedings or material developments in proceedings that we previously reported in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 . Litigation We hereby incorporate by reference into this Item our disclosures made in Part I, Item 1 of this report included in Note 5 of Condensed Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under the caption “Litigation Matters.” Environmental Enforcement Matters While it is not possible to predict the outcome of the following environmental proceedings, if any one or more of them were decided against us, we believe that there would be no material effect on our financial position, results of operations, or liquidity. We are reporting these proceedings to comply with SEC regulations, which require us to disclose certain information about proceedings arising under federal, state, or local provisions regulating the discharge of materials into the environment or protecting the environment if we reasonably believe that such proceedings will result in monetary sanctions of $100,000 or more. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (Ardmore Refinery) . In May 2016, we received a penalty demand in the amount of $730,820 from the EPA for alleged reporting violations at our Ardmore Refinery. We are currently working with the EPA to resolve the matter. EPA (Benicia Refinery) . In May 2016, we received settlement communications from the EPA regarding various alleged reporting and storage violations at our Benicia Refinery, which we reasonably believe will result in penalties in excess of $100,000. We are currently working with the EPA to resolve the matter. Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD) (Benicia Refinery). We currently have multiple outstanding Violation Notices (VNs) issued by the BAAQMD from 2011 to the present. These VNs are for alleged reporting violations and excess emissions at our Benicia Refinery and asphalt plant. In the second quarter of 2016, we entered into an Agreement with BAAQMD to resolve various VNs and continue to work with the BAAQMD to resolve the remaining VNs. South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD ) (Wilmington Refinery). We currently have multiple Notices of Violations (NOVs) issued by the SCAQMD from 2013 to present. These NOVs are for alleged reporting violations and excess emissions at our Wilmington Refinery. In the second quarter of  2016, we entered into an Agreement with SCAQMD to resolve various NOVs and continue to work with the SCAQMD to resolve the remaining NOVs. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) (McKee Refinery). In May 2016, we received a proposed Agreed Order in the amount of $121,314 from the TCEQ as an administrative penalty for alleged excess emissions at our McKee Refinery. We are working with the TCEQ to resolve the matter. TCEQ (Port Arthur Refinery). In our quarterly report for the quarter ended March 31, 2016, we reported that we received a Notice of Enforcement (NOE) from the TCEQ for excess emissions at our Port Arthur Refinery. We have resolved this NOE with the TCEQ. 73 Table of Contents Item 1A. Risk Factors We disclose the following risk factor in addition to the risk factors we have disclosed in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 . Compliance with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) could adversely affect our performance. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has implemented a Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) pursuant to the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007. The RFS program sets annual quotas for the quantity of renewable fuels (such as ethanol) that must be blended into transportation fuels consumed in the United States. A Renewable Identification Number (RIN) is assigned to each gallon of renewable fuel produced in or imported into the United States. As a producer of petroleum-based transportation fuels, we are obligated to blend renewable fuels into the products we produce at a rate that is at least commensurate to the EPA’s quota and, to the extent we do not, we must purchase RINs in the open market to satisfy our obligation under the RFS program. We are exposed to the volatility in the market price of RINs. We cannot predict the future prices of RINs. RINs prices are dependent upon a variety of factors, including EPA regulations, the availability of RINs for purchase, the price at which RINs can be purchased, and levels of transportation fuels produced, all of which can vary significantly from quarter to quarter. If sufficient RINs are unavailable for purchase or if we have to pay a significantly higher price for RINs, or if we are otherwise unable to meet the EPA’s RFS mandates, our results of operations and cash flows could be adversely affected. 74 Table of Contents Item 6. Exhibits ______________ 75 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. Date: August 4, 2016 76