10-Q 1 mpc-20190331x10q.htm 10-Q Document Table of Contents UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q (Mark One) For the quarterly period ended March 31, 2019 OR For the transition period from to Commission file number 001-35054 Marathon Petroleum Corporation (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) (419) 422-2121 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes x No ¨ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files.) Yes x No ¨ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ¨ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act) Yes ¨ No x There were 662,618,001 shares of Marathon Petroleum Corporation common stock outstanding as of May 3, 2019 . Table of Contents MARATHON PETROLEUM CORPORATION FORM 10-Q FOR THE QUARTERLY PERIOD ENDED MARCH 31, 2019 TABLE OF CONTENTS Unless otherwise stated or the context otherwise indicates, all references in this Form 10-Q to “MPC,” “us,” “our,” “we” or “the Company” mean Marathon Petroleum Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries. 1 GLOSSARY OF TERMS Throughout this report, the following company or industry specific terms and abbreviations are used: 2 PART I – FINANCIAL INFORMATION ITEM 1. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS MARATHON PETROLEUM CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements. 3 Table of Contents MARATHON PETROLEUM CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements. 4 Table of Contents MARATHON PETROLEUM CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements. 5 Table of Contents MARATHON PETROLEUM CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements. 6 Table of Contents MARATHON PETROLEUM CORPORATION CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EQUITY AND REDEEMBALE NONCONTROLLING INTEREST (Unaudited) The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements. 7 Table of Contents NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (UNAUDITED) 1 . DESCRIPTION OF THE BUSINESS AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION Description of the Business We are a leading, integrated, downstream energy company headquartered in Findlay, Ohio. We operate the nation's largest refining system with more than 3 million barrels per day of crude oil capacity across 16 refineries. We sell refined products to wholesale marketing customers domestically and internationally, to buyers on the spot market, to consumers through our Retail business segment and to independent entrepreneurs who operate approximately 6,900 branded outlets. Our retail operations own and operate approximately 3,920 retail transportation fuel and convenience stores across the United States and also sell transportation fuel to consumers through approximately 1,060 direct dealer locations under long-term supply contracts. MPC’s midstream operations are primarily conducted through MPLX LP (“MPLX”) and Andeavor Logistics LP (“ANDX”), which own and operate crude oil and light product transportation and logistics infrastructure as well as gathering, processing, and fractionation assets. We own the general partner and majority limited partner interest in these two midstream companies. Refer to Note 4 for further information on the Andeavor acquisition, which closed on October 1, 2018, and to Notes 3 and 9 for additional information about our operations. Basis of Presentation All significant intercompany transactions and accounts have been eliminated. These interim consolidated financial statements are unaudited; however, in the opinion of our management, these statements reflect all adjustments necessary for a fair statement of the results for the periods reported. All such adjustments are of a normal, recurring nature unless otherwise disclosed. These interim consolidated financial statements, including the notes, have been prepared in accordance with the rules of the SEC applicable to interim period financial statements and do not include all of the information and disclosures required by GAAP for complete financial statements. These interim consolidated financial statements should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018 . The results of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2019 are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for the full year. 2 . ACCOUNTING STANDARDS Recently Adopted ASU 2016-02, Leases We adopted ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (“ASC 842”), as of January 1, 2019, electing the transition method which permits entities to adopt the provisions of the standard using the modified retrospective approach without adjusting comparative periods. We also elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, which among other things, allowed us to grandfather the historical accounting conclusions until a reassessment event is present. We have also elected the practical expedient to not recognize short-term leases on the balance sheet, the practical expedient related to right of way permits and land easements which allows us to carry forward our accounting treatment for those existing agreements, and the practical expedient to combine lease and non-lease components for the majority of our underlying classes of assets except for our third-party contractor service and equipment agreements and boat and barge equipment agreements in which we are the lessee. We did not elect the practical expedient to combine lease and non-lease components for arrangements in which we are the lessor. In instances where the practical expedient was not elected, lease and non-lease consideration is allocated based on relative standalone selling price. Right of use (“ROU”) assets represent our right to use an underlying asset in which we obtain substantially all of the economic benefits and the right to direct the use of the asset during the lease term. Lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. We recognize ROU assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet for leases with a lease term of greater than one year. Payments that are not fixed at the commencement of the lease are considered variable and are excluded from the ROU asset and lease liability calculations. In the measurement of our ROU assets and lease liabilities, the fixed lease payments in the agreement are discounted using a secured incremental borrowing rate for a term similar to the duration of the lease, as our leases do not provide implicit rates. Operating lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. 8 Table of Contents Adoption of the new standard resulted in the recording of ROU assets and lease liabilities of approximately $2.79 billion and $2.88 billion , respectively, as of January 1, 2019. The standard did not materially impact our consolidated statements of income, cash flows or equity as a result of adoption. As a lessor under ASC 842, MPLX may be required to re-classify existing operating leases to sales-type leases upon modification and related reassessment of the leases. If such a modification were to occur, it may result in the de-recognition of existing assets, recognition of a receivable in the amount of the present value of fixed payments expected to be received by MPLX under the lease, and recognition of a corresponding gain or loss in the period of change. MPLX will evaluate the impact of a lease reassessment as modifications occur. We also adopted the following ASUs during the first three months of 2019, none of which had a material impact to our financial statements or financial statement disclosures: Not Yet Adopted ASU 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment In January 2017, the FASB issued an ASU which simplifies the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test. Under the new guidance, the recognition of an impairment charge is calculated based on the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, which could be different from the amount calculated under the current method using the implied fair value of the goodwill; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. The guidance should be applied on a prospective basis, and is effective for annual or any interim goodwill impairment tests in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. ASU 2016-13, Credit Losses - Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments In June 2016, the FASB issued an ASU related to the accounting for credit losses on certain financial instruments. The guidance requires that for most financial assets, losses be based on an expected loss approach which includes estimates of losses over the life of exposure that considers historical, current and forecasted information. Expanded disclosures related to the methods used to estimate the losses as well as a specific disaggregation of balances for financial assets are also required. The change is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim periods within those fiscal years. We do not expect application of this ASU to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. 3 . MASTER LIMITED PARTNERSHIPS MPLX MPLX is a diversified, large-cap publicly traded limited partnership formed by us to own, operate, develop and acquire midstream energy infrastructure assets. MPLX is engaged in the transportation, storage and distribution of crude oil and refined petroleum products; gathering, processing and transportation of natural gas; and the gathering, transportation, fractionation, storage and marketing of NGLs. As of March 31, 2019 , we owned 64 percent of the outstanding MPLX common units and we control MPLX through our ownership of the general partner of MPLX. Dropdowns to MPLX and GP/IDR Exchange On February 1, 2018, we contributed refining logistics assets and fuels distribution services to MPLX in exchange for $4.1 billion in cash and approximately 112 million common units and 2 million general partner units from MPLX. MPLX financed the cash portion of the transaction with its $4.1 billion 364 -day term loan facility, which was entered into on January 2, 2018. We agreed to waive approximately one-third of the first quarter 2018 distributions on the common units issued in connection with this transaction. The contributions of these assets were accounted for as transactions between entities under common control and we did not record a gain or loss. Immediately following the February 1, 2018 dropdown to MPLX, our IDRs were cancelled and our economic general partner interest was converted into a non-economic general partner interest, all in exchange for 275 million newly issued MPLX common units (“GP/IDR Exchange”). As a result of this transaction, the general partner units and IDRs were eliminated, are no longer outstanding and no longer participate in distributions of cash from MPLX. 9 Table of Contents Agreements We have various long-term, fee-based commercial agreements with MPLX. Under these agreements, MPLX provides transportation, storage, distribution and marketing services to us. Under certain agreements, we commit to provide MPLX with minimum throughput and distribution volumes of crude oil and refined products and minimum storage volumes of crude oil, refined products and butane. Under certain other agreements, we commit to pay for substantially all of the available capacity for certain marine transportation and refining logistics assets. These transactions are eliminated in consolidation, but are reflected as intersegment transactions between our Refining & Marketing and Midstream segments. We also have agreements with MPLX that establish fees for operational and management services provided between us and MPLX and for executive management services and certain general and administrative services provided by us to MPLX. These transactions are eliminated in consolidation, but are reflected as intersegment transactions between our Corporate and Midstream segments. ANDX Through the Andeavor acquisition, we acquired control of ANDX, which is a publicly traded limited partnership that was formed to own, operate, develop and acquire logistics assets. Its assets are integral to the success of our refining and marketing operations and are used to gather crude oil, natural gas, and water, process natural gas and distribute, transport and store crude oil and refined products. ANDX provides us with various pipeline transportation, trucking, terminal distribution, storage and petroleum-coke handling services under long-term, fee-based commercial agreements. With certain exceptions, these agreements generally contain minimum volume commitments. These transactions are eliminated in consolidation, but are reflected as intersegment transactions between our Refining & Marketing and Midstream segments. We also have agreements with ANDX that establish fees for operational and management services provided between us and ANDX and for executive management services and certain general and administrative services provided by us to ANDX. These transactions are eliminated in consolidation, but are reflected as intersegment transactions between our Corporate and Midstream segments. As of March 31, 2019 , we owned 64 percent of the outstanding ANDX common units. We also hold 80,000 ANDX TexNew Mex Units as of March 31, 2019 and control ANDX through our ownership of the general partner of ANDX. Noncontrolling Interest As a result of equity transactions of MPLX and ANDX, we are required to adjust non-controlling interest and additional paid-in capital. Changes in MPC’s additional paid-in capital resulting from changes in its ownership interests in MPLX and ANDX were as follows: 4 . ACQUISITIONS Acquisition of Andeavor On October 1, 2018, we acquired all the outstanding shares of Andeavor. The total value of consideration transferred was $23.46 billion , consisting of $19.97 billion in equity and $3.49 billion in cash. The cash portion of the purchase price was funded using cash on hand. Our financial results reflect the results of Andeavor from the date of the acquisition. We accounted for the Andeavor acquisition using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires Andeavor assets and liabilities to be recorded to our balance sheet at fair value as of the acquisition date. We will complete a final determination of the fair value of certain assets and liabilities within the one year measurement period from the date of the acquisition as required by FASB ASC Topic 805, “Business Combinations”. Due to the level of effort required to develop fair value measurements, the valuation studies necessary to determine the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed are preliminary, including the underlying cash flows used to determine the fair value of identified intangible assets and economic obsolescence adjustments to property, plant and equipment. The size and the breadth of the Andeavor acquisition necessitates the use of the one year measurement period to fully analyze all the factors used in establishing the asset and liability fair values as of the acquisition date, including, but not limited to, property, plant and equipment, intangible assets, real property, leases, 10 Table of Contents environmental and asset retirement obligations and the related tax impacts of any changes made. Any potential adjustments made could be material in relation to the preliminary values. During the three months ended March 31, 2019, we recorded adjustments to the preliminary fair value estimates of assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date as noted in the table below. The preliminary purchase consideration allocation resulted in the recognition of $16.38 billion in goodwill, of which $893 million is tax deductible due to a carryover basis from Andeavor. Our Refining & Marketing, Midstream and Retail segments recognized $4.78 billion , $7.72 billion and $3.88 billion of preliminary goodwill. The recognized goodwill represents the value expected to be created by further optimization of crude supply, a nationwide retail and marketing platform, diversification of our refining and midstream footprints and optimization of information systems and business processes. Pro Forma Financial Information The following unaudited pro forma financial information presents consolidated results assuming the Andeavor acquisition occurred on January 1, 2017. The unaudited pro forma information does not give effect to potential synergies that could result from the transaction and is not necessarily indicative of the results of future operations. The pro forma information includes adjustments to align accounting policies, including our policy to expense refinery turnarounds when they occur, an adjustment to depreciation expense to reflect the increased fair value of property, plant and equipment, increased amortization expense related to identifiable intangible assets and the related income tax effects. 11 Table of Contents Acquisition of Express Mart During the fourth quarter of 2018, Speedway acquired 78 transportation fuel and convenience store locations from Petr-All Petroleum Consulting Corporation for total consideration of $266 million . These stores are located primarily in the Syracuse, Rochester and Buffalo markets in New York and had been operated under the Express Mart brand. Based on the final fair value estimates of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, $97 million of the purchase price was allocated to property, plant and equipment, $9 million to inventory, $2 million to intangibles and $158 million to goodwill. Goodwill is tax deductible and represents the value expected to be created by geographically expanding our retail platform and the assembled workforce. These operations are accounted for within the Retail segment. Acquisition of Mt. Airy Terminal On September 26, 2018, MPLX acquired an eastern U.S. Gulf Coast export terminal (“Mt. Airy Terminal”) from Pin Oak Holdings, LLC for total consideration of $451 million . At the time of the acquisition, the terminal included tanks with 4 million barrels of third-party leased storage capacity and a dock with 120 mbpd of capacity. The Mt. Airy Terminal is located on the Mississippi River between New Orleans and Baton Rouge, near several Gulf Coast refineries, including our Garyville Refinery, and numerous rail lines and pipelines. The Mt. Airy Terminal is accounted for within the Midstream segment. In the first quarter of 2019, an adjustment to the initial purchase price was made for approximately $5 million related to the final settlement of the acquisition. This reduced the total purchase price to $446 million and resulted in $336 million of property, plant and equipment, $121 million of goodwill and the remainder being attributable to net liabilities assumed. Goodwill represents the significant growth potential of the terminal due to the multiple pipelines and rail lines which cross the property, the terminal’s position as an aggregation point for liquids growth in the region for both ocean-going vessels and inland barges, the proximity of the terminal to MPC’s Garyville refinery and other refineries in the region as well as the opportunity to construct an additional dock at the site. All of the goodwill recognized related to this transaction is tax deductible. Assuming the acquisitions of Express Mart and Mt. Airy Terminal had occurred on January 1, 2017, the consolidated pro forma results would not have been materially different from the reported results. 5 . VARIABLE INTEREST ENTITIES Consolidated VIEs We control MPLX and ANDX through our ownership of the general partner of both entities. MPLX and ANDX are VIEs because the limited partners do not have substantive kick-out or substantive participating rights over the general partner. We are the primary beneficiary of both MPLX and ANDX because in addition to our significant economic interest, we also have the ability, through our ownership of the general partner, to control the decisions that most significantly impact MPLX and ANDX. We therefore consolidate MPLX and ANDX and record a noncontrolling interest for the interest owned by the public. We also record a redeemable noncontrolling interest related to MPLX’s preferred units. The creditors of MPLX and ANDX do not have recourse to MPC’s general credit through guarantees or other financial arrangements, except as noted. MPC has effectively guaranteed certain indebtedness of LOOP LLC (“LOOP”) and LOCAP LLC (“LOCAP”), in which MPLX holds an interest. See Note 24 for more information. Western Refining Southwest, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of MPC and unitholder of ANDX, has guaranteed certain outstanding borrowings under the ANDX dropdown credit facility that were made in connection with the August 2018 dropdown transaction. 12 Table of Contents The assets of MPLX and ANDX can only be used to settle their own obligations and their creditors have no recourse to our assets, except as noted above. The following table present balance sheet information for the assets and liabilities of MPLX and ANDX, which are included in our balance sheets. 6 . RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS Transactions with related parties were as follows: Summarized financial information, in the aggregate, for our significant equity method investments on a 100 percent basis were as follows: 13 Table of Contents 7 . INCOME (LOSS) PER COMMON SHARE We compute basic earnings per share by dividing net income attributable to MPC less income allocated to participating securities by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding. Since MPC grants certain incentive compensation awards to employees and non-employee directors that are considered to be participating securities, we have calculated our earnings per share using the two-class method. Diluted income per share assumes exercise of certain stock-based compensation awards, provided the effect is not anti-dilutive. The following table summarizes the shares that were anti-dilutive and, therefore, were excluded from the diluted share calculation. 8 . EQUITY As of March 31, 2019 , we had $4.02 billion of share repurchase authorization remaining under authorizations from our board of directors. We may utilize various methods to effect the repurchases, which could include open market repurchases, negotiated block transactions, accelerated share repurchases or open market solicitations for shares, some of which may be effected through Rule 10b5-1 plans. The timing and amount of future repurchases, if any, will depend upon several factors, including market and business conditions, and such repurchases may be discontinued at any time. Total share repurchases were as follows: As of March 31, 2019 , we had agreements to acquire 493,625 common shares for $30 million , which settled in early April 2019. 14 Table of Contents 9 . SEGMENT INFORMATION We have three reportable segments: Refining & Marketing; Retail; and Midstream. Each of these segments is organized and managed based upon the nature of the products and services it offers. Segment income represents income from operations attributable to the reportable segments. Corporate administrative expenses, except for those attributable to MPLX and ANDX, and costs related to certain non-operating assets are not allocated to the Refining & Marketing and Retail segments. In addition, certain items that affect comparability (as determined by the chief operating decision maker) are not allocated to the reportable segments. 15 Table of Contents The following reconciles segment income from operations to income before income taxes as reported in the consolidated statements of income: The following reconciles segment capital expenditures and investments to total capital expenditures: 10 . NET INTEREST AND OTHER FINANCIAL COSTS Net interest and other financial costs were as follows: 16 Table of Contents 11 . INCOME TAXES The combined federal, state and foreign income tax rate was 29 percent and 9 percent for the three months ended March 31, 2019 and 2018 , respectively. The effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2019 was greater than the U.S. statutory rate of 21 percent primarily due to $36 million of state deferred tax expense recorded as an out of period adjustment, partially offset by permanent tax differences related to net income attributable to noncontrolling interests. The effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2018 was less than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to certain permanent tax differences related to net income attributable to noncontrolling interests, state and local deferred tax benefits primarily resulting from the February 1 dropdown and GP/IDR Exchange and equity compensation. During the first quarter of 2019, MPC’s deferred tax liabilities increased $68 million with an offsetting increase to goodwill and the provision for income taxes of $32 million and $36 million , respectively for an out of period adjustment to correct the tax effects recorded in 2018 related to the Andeavor acquisition. The impact of the adjustment was not material to any previous period. We are continuously undergoing examination of our income tax returns, which have been completed through the 2005 tax year for state returns and the 2008 tax year for our U.S. federal return. As of March 31, 2019 , we had $231 million of unrecognized tax benefits. Prior to its spinoff on June 30, 2011, Marathon Petroleum Corporation was included in the Marathon Oil Corporation (“Marathon Oil”) U.S. federal income tax returns for all applicable years. During the third quarter of 2017, Marathon Oil received a notice of Final Partnership Administrative Adjustment (“FPAA”) from the U.S. Internal Revenue Service for taxable year 2010, relating to certain partnership transactions. Marathon Oil filed a U.S. Tax Court petition disputing these adjustments during the fourth quarter of 2017. We received an FPAA for taxable years 2011-2014 for items resulting from this matter and filed a U.S. Tax Court petition for tax years 2011-2014 to dispute these corollary adjustments in the fourth quarter of 2017. We continue to believe that the issue in dispute is more likely than not to be fully sustained and, therefore, no liability has been accrued for this matter. Pursuant to our tax sharing agreement with Marathon Oil, the unrecognized tax benefits related to pre-spinoff operations for which Marathon Oil was the taxpayer remain the responsibility of Marathon Oil and we have indemnified Marathon Oil accordingly. See Note 24 for indemnification information. 12 . INVENTORIES Inventories are carried at the lower of cost or market value. The cost of inventories of crude oil and refinery feedstocks, refined products and merchandise is determined primarily under the LIFO method. There were no LIFO inventory liquidations recognized for the three months ended March 31, 2019 . 13 . EQUITY METHOD INVESTMENTS During the three months ended March 31, 2019 , we executed agreements with Capline Pipeline LLC (“Capline LLC”) to contribute our 33 percent undivided interest in Capline pipeline system in exchange for a 33 percent ownership interest in Capline LLC. Concurrent with our execution of these agreements, Capline LLC initiated a binding open season for southbound service from Patoka, IL to St. James, LA or Liberty, MS, with an additional origination point at Cushing, OK. Service from Cushing, OK is part of a joint tariff with Diamond pipeline. Crude oil service is expected to begin in the third quarter of  2020. In accordance with ASC 810 “Consolidation”, we derecognized our undivided interest amounting to $143 million of net assets and recognized the Capline LLC ownership interest we received at fair value. We used an income approach to determine the fair value of our ownership interest under a Monte Carlo simulation method. We determined the fair value of our ownership interest was estimated to be $350 million as of January 30, 2019. This is a nonrecurring fair value measurement and is categorized in level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. The Monte Carlo simulation inputs include ranges of tariff rates, operating 17 Table of Contents volumes, operating cost and capital expenditure assumptions. The estimated cash flows were discounted using a Monte Carlo market participant weighted average cost of capital estimate. None of the inputs to the Monte Carlo simulation are individually significant. The excess of the estimated fair value of our ownership interest over the carrying value of the derecognized net assets resulted in a $207 million non cash net gain recorded as a net gain on disposal of assets in the accompanying consolidated statements of income. As the Capline system is currently idled, Capline LLC is unable to fund its operations without financial support from its equity owners and is a VIE. MPC is not deemed to be the primary beneficiary, due to our inability to unilaterally control significant decision-making rights. Our maximum exposure to loss as a result of our involvement with Capline LLC includes our equity investment, any additional capital contribution commitments and any operating expenses incurred by Capline LLC in excess of compensation received for performance of the operating services. 14 . PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 15 . FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS Fair Values—Recurring The following tables present assets and liabilities accounted for at fair value on a recurring basis as of March 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 by fair value hierarchy level. We have elected to offset the fair value amounts recognized for multiple derivative contracts executed with the same counterparty, including any related cash collateral as shown below; however, fair value amounts by hierarchy level are presented on a gross basis in the following tables. 18 Table of Contents Commodity derivatives in Level 1 are exchange-traded contracts for crude oil and refined products measured at fair value with a market approach using the close-of-day settlement prices for the market. Commodity derivatives are covered under master netting agreements with an unconditional right to offset. Collateral deposits in futures commission merchant accounts covered by master netting agreements related to Level 1 commodity derivatives are classified as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. Level 2 instruments are valued based on quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, and inputs other than quoted prices, such as liquidity, that are observable for the asset or liability. Commodity derivatives in Level 2 are OTC contracts, which are valued using market quotations from independent price reporting agencies, third-party brokers and commodity exchange price curves that are corroborated with market data. Level 3 instruments are OTC NGL contracts and embedded derivatives in commodity contracts. The embedded derivative liability relates to a natural gas purchase agreement embedded in a keep‑whole processing agreement. The fair value calculation for these Level 3 instruments at March 31, 2019 used significant unobservable inputs including: (1) NGL prices interpolated and extrapolated due to inactive markets ranging from $0.60 to $1.25 per gallon and (2) the probability of renewal of 91 percent for the first five -year term and 82 percent for the second five -year term of the natural gas purchase agreement and the related keep-whole processing agreement. For these contracts, increases in forward NGL prices result in a decrease in the fair value of the derivative assets and an increase in the fair value of the derivative liabilities. Increases or decreases in the fractionation spread result in an increase or decrease in the fair value of the embedded derivative liability. An increase in the probability of renewal would result in an increase in the fair value of the related embedded derivative liability. The following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances recorded for net liabilities classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy. Fair Values – Reported We believe the carrying value of our other financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, receivables, accounts payable and certain accrued liabilities, approximate fair value. Our fair value assessment incorporates a variety of considerations, including the short-term duration of the instruments and the expected insignificance of bad debt expense, which includes an evaluation of counterparty credit risk. The borrowings under our revolving credit facilities, which include variable interest rates, approximate fair value. The fair value of our fixed rate long-term debt is based on prices from recent trade activity and is categorized in level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. The carrying and fair values of our debt were approximately $27.6 billion and $28.5 billion at March 31, 2019 , respectively, and approximately $27.0 billion and $26.5 billion at 19 Table of Contents December 31, 2018 , respectively. These carrying and fair values of our debt exclude the unamortized issuance costs which are netted against our total debt. 16 . DERIVATIVES For further information regarding the fair value measurement of derivative instruments, including any effect of master netting agreements or collateral, see Note 15 . We do not designate any of our commodity derivative instruments as hedges for accounting purposes. Derivatives that are not designated as accounting hedges may include commodity derivatives used to hedge price risk on (1) inventories, (2) fixed price sales of refined products, (3) the acquisition of foreign-sourced crude oil, (4) the acquisition of ethanol for blending with refined products, (5) the sale of NGLs and (6) the purchase of natural gas. The following table presents the fair value of derivative instruments as of March 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 and the line items in the balance sheets in which the fair values are reflected. The fair value amounts below are presented on a gross basis and do not reflect the netting of asset and liability positions permitted under the terms of our master netting arrangements including cash collateral on deposit with, or received from, brokers. We offset the recognized fair value amounts for multiple derivative instruments executed with the same counterparty in our financial statements when a legal right of offset exists. As a result, the asset and liability amounts below will not agree with the amounts presented in our consolidated balance sheets. The table below summarizes open commodity derivative contracts for crude oil, refined products and blending products as of March 31, 2019 . 20 Table of Contents The following table summarizes the effect of all commodity derivative instruments in our consolidated statements of income: 17 . DEBT Our outstanding borrowings at March 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 consisted of the following: Available Capacity under our Facilities 21 Table of Contents 18 . REVENUE The following table presents our revenues disaggregated by product line. Practical Expedients On January 1, 2018, we adopted ASU 2014-09, Revenue - Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). We elected the completed contract practical expedient and only applied ASC 606 to contracts that were not completed as of January 1, 2018. We do not disclose information on the future performance obligations for any contract with expected duration of one year or less at inception. As of March 31, 2019 , we do not have future performance obligations that are material to future periods. Receivables On the accompanying consolidated balance sheets, receivables, less allowance for doubtful accounts primarily consists of customer receivables. Significant, non-customer balances included in our receivables at March 31, 2019 include matching buy/sell receivables of $1.98 billion and income tax receivables of $76 million . 19 . SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION 22 Table of Contents The consolidated statements of cash flows exclude changes to the consolidated balance sheets that did not affect cash. The following is a reconciliation of additions to property, plant and equipment to total capital expenditures: 20 . ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE LOSS The following table shows the changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss by component. Amounts in parentheses indicate debits. 23 Table of Contents 21 . DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION AND OTHER POSTRETIREMENT PLANS The following summarizes the components of net periodic benefit costs: The components of net periodic benefit cost other than the service cost component are included in net interest and other financial costs on the consolidated statements of income. During the three months ended March 31, 2019 , we made no contributions to our funded pension plans. Benefit payments related to unfunded pension and other postretirement benefit plans were $3 million and $11 million , respectively, during the three months ended March 31, 2019 . 22 . STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION PLANS Stock Option Awards The following table presents a summary of our stock option award activity for the three months ended March 31, 2019 : The grant date fair value of stock option awards granted during the three months ended March 31, 2019 was $14.34 per share. The fair value of stock options granted to our employees is estimated on the date of the grant using the Black Scholes option-pricing model, which employs various assumptions. 24 Table of Contents Restricted Stock and Restricted Stock Unit Awards The following table presents a summary of restricted stock and restricted stock unit award activity for the three months ended March 31, 2019 : Performance Unit Awards The following table presents a summary of the activity for performance unit awards to be settled in shares for the three months ended March 31, 2019 : The performance unit awards granted during the three months ended March 31, 2019 have a grant date fair value of $0.72 per unit, as calculated using a Monte Carlo valuation model. MPLX and ANDX Awards Compensation expense for MPLX and ANDX equity awards was not material to our consolidated financial statements for the three months ended March 31, 2019 . 23 . LEASES For further information regarding the adoption of ASC 842, including the method of adoption and practical expedients elected, see Note 2 . Lessee We lease a wide variety of facilities and equipment including land and building space, office and field equipment, storage facilities and transportation equipment. Our remaining lease terms range from less than one year to 60 years . Most long-term leases include renewal options ranging from less than one year to 49 years and, in certain leases, also include purchase options. The lease term included in the measurement of right of use assets and lease liabilities includes options to extend or terminate our leases that we are reasonably certain to exercise. Options were included in the lease term primarily for retail store sites where we constructed property, plant and equipment on leased land that is expected to exist beyond the initial lease term. 25 Table of Contents Under ASC 842, the components of lease cost were as follows: Supplemental balance sheet data related to leases were as follows: 26 Table of Contents As of March 31, 2019 , maturities of lease liabilities for operating lease obligations and finance lease obligations having initial or remaining non-cancellable lease terms in excess of one year are as follows: Presented in accordance with ASC 840, future minimum commitments as of December 31, 2018 for operating lease obligations and capital lease obligations having initial or remaining non-cancellable lease terms in excess of one year were as follows: Lessor MPLX has certain natural gas gathering, transportation and processing agreements in which it is considered to be the lessor under several implicit operating lease arrangements in accordance with GAAP. MPLX’s primary implicit lease operations relate to a natural gas gathering agreement in the Marcellus region for which it earns a fixed-fee for providing gathering services to a single producer using a dedicated gathering system. As the gathering system is expanded, the fixed-fee charged to the producer is adjusted to include the additional gathering assets in the lease. The primary term of the natural gas gathering arrangement expires in 2038 and will continue thereafter on a year-to-year basis until terminated by either party. Other significant implicit leases relate to a natural gas processing agreement in the Marcellus region and a natural gas processing agreement in the Southern Appalachia region for which MPLX earns minimum monthly fees for providing processing services to a single producer using a dedicated processing plant. The primary term of these natural gas processing agreements expire during 2023 and 2033. MPLX did not elect to use the practical expedient to combine lease and non-lease components for lessor arrangements. The tables below represent the portion of the contract allocated to the lease component based on relative standalone selling price. Lessor agreements are currently deemed operating, as we elected the practical expedient to grandfather in old conclusions. We are still determining the impact of the new standard on these arrangements if and when a modification occurs and they are required to be assessed under ASC 842. MPLX may be required to re-classify existing operating leases to sales-type leases upon modification and related reassessment of the leases. Our revenue from implicit lease arrangements, excluding executory costs, totaled approximately $60 million in the three months ended March 31, 2019 . The implicit lease arrangements related to the processing facilities contain contingent rental provisions whereby we receive additional fees if the producer customer exceeds the monthly minimum processed volumes. During the three months ended March 31, 2019 , MPLX did not receive any material contingent lease payments. The following is a schedule of minimum future rentals on the non‑cancellable operating leases as of March 31, 2019 : 27 Table of Contents The following schedule summarizes our investment in assets held for operating lease by major classes as of March 31, 2019 : 24 . COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES We are the subject of, or a party to, a number of pending or threatened legal actions, contingencies and commitments involving a variety of matters, including laws and regulations relating to the environment. Some of these matters are discussed below. For matters for which we have not recorded a liability, we are unable to estimate a range of possible loss because the issues involved have not been fully developed through pleadings, discovery or court proceedings. However, the ultimate resolution of some of these contingencies could, individually or in the aggregate, be material. Environmental Matters We are subject to federal, state, local and foreign laws and regulations relating to the environment. These laws generally provide for control of pollutants released into the environment and require responsible parties to undertake remediation of hazardous waste disposal sites and certain other locations including presently or formerly owned or operated retail marketing sites. Penalties may be imposed for noncompliance. At March 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 , accrued liabilities for remediation totaled $451 million and $455 million , respectively. It is not presently possible to estimate the ultimate amount of all remediation costs that might be incurred or the penalties if any that may be imposed. Receivables for recoverable costs from certain states, under programs to assist companies in clean-up efforts related to underground storage tanks at presently or formerly owned or operated retail marketing sites, were $33 million and $35 million at March 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 , respectively. Governmental and other entities in California, New York, Maryland and Rhode Island have filed lawsuits against coal, gas, oil and petroleum companies, including the Company. The lawsuits allege damages as a result of climate change and the plaintiffs are seeking unspecified damages and abatement under various tort theories. Similar lawsuits may be filed in other jurisdictions. At this early stage, the ultimate outcome of these matters remain uncertain, and neither the likelihood of an unfavorable outcome nor the ultimate liability, if any, can be determined. We are involved in a number of environmental enforcement matters arising in the ordinary course of business. While the outcome and impact on us cannot be predicted with certainty, management believes the resolution of these environmental matters will not, individually or collectively, have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. 28 Table of Contents Lawsuits In May 2015, the Kentucky attorney general filed a lawsuit against our wholly-owned subsidiary, Marathon Petroleum Company LP (“MPC LP”), in the United States District Court for the Western District of Kentucky asserting claims under federal and state antitrust statutes, the Kentucky Consumer Protection Act, and state common law. The complaint, as amended in July 2015, alleges that MPC LP used deed restrictions, supply agreements with customers and exchange agreements with competitors to unreasonably restrain trade in areas within Kentucky and seeks declaratory relief, unspecified damages, civil penalties, restitution and disgorgement of profits. At this stage, the ultimate outcome of this litigation remains uncertain, and neither the likelihood of an unfavorable outcome nor the ultimate liability, if any, can be determined, and we are unable to estimate a reasonably possible loss (or range of loss) for this matter. We intend to vigorously defend ourselves in this matter. In May 2007, the Kentucky attorney general filed a lawsuit against us and Marathon Oil in state court in Franklin County, Kentucky for alleged violations of Kentucky’s emergency pricing and consumer protection laws following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005. The lawsuit alleges that we overcharged customers by $89 million during September and October 2005 . The complaint seeks disgorgement of these sums, as well as penalties, under Kentucky’s emergency pricing and consumer protection laws. We are vigorously defending this litigation. We believe that this is the first lawsuit for damages and injunctive relief under the Kentucky emergency pricing laws to progress this far and it contains many novel issues. In May 2011, the Kentucky attorney general amended his complaint to include a request for immediate injunctive relief as well as unspecified damages and penalties related to our wholesale gasoline pricing in April and May 2011 under statewide price controls that were activated by the Kentucky governor on April 26, 2011 and which have since expired. The court denied the attorney general’s request for immediate injunctive relief, and the remainder of the 2011 claims likely will be resolved along with those dating from 2005. If the lawsuit is resolved unfavorably in its entirety, it could materially impact our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. However, management does not believe the ultimate resolution of this litigation will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. We are also a party to a number of other lawsuits and other proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. While the ultimate outcome and impact to us cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe that the resolution of these other lawsuits and proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Guarantees We have provided certain guarantees, direct and indirect, of the indebtedness of other companies. Under the terms of most of these guarantee arrangements, we would be required to perform should the guaranteed party fail to fulfill its obligations under the specified arrangements. In addition to these financial guarantees, we also have various performance guarantees related to specific agreements. Guarantees related to indebtedness of equity method investees —MPC and MPLX hold interests in an offshore oil port, LOOP, and MPLX holds an interest in a crude oil pipeline system, LOCAP. Both LOOP and LOCAP have secured various project financings with throughput and deficiency agreements. Under the agreements, MPC, as a shipper, is required to advance funds if the investees are unable to service their debt. Any such advances are considered prepayments of future transportation charges. The duration of the agreements vary but tend to follow the terms of the underlying debt, which extend through 2037 . Our maximum potential undiscounted payments under these agreements for the debt principal totaled $171 million as of March 31, 2019 . In connection with MPLX’s approximate nine percent indirect interest in a joint venture that owns and operates the Dakota Access Pipeline and Energy Transfer Crude Oil Pipeline projects, collectively referred to as the Bakken Pipeline system, MPLX has entered into a Contingent Equity Contribution Agreement. MPLX, along with the other joint venture owners in the Bakken Pipeline system, have agreed to make equity contributions to the joint venture upon certain events occurring to allow the entities that own and operate the Bakken Pipeline system to satisfy their senior note payment obligations. The senior notes were issued to repay amounts owed by the pipeline companies to fund the cost of construction of the Bakken Pipeline system. As of March 31, 2019 , our maximum potential undiscounted payments under the Contingent Equity Contribution Agreement was approximately $230 million . In connection with our 50 percent indirect interest in Crowley Ocean Partners, we have agreed to conditionally guarantee our portion of the obligations of the joint venture and its subsidiaries under a senior secured term loan agreement. The term loan agreement provides for loans of up to $325 million to finance the acquisition of four product tankers. MPC’s liability under the guarantee for each vessel is conditioned upon the occurrence of certain events, including if we cease to maintain an investment grade credit rating or the charter for the relevant product tanker ceases to be in effect and is not replaced by a charter with an investment grade company on certain defined commercial terms. As of March 31, 2019 , our maximum potential undiscounted payments under this agreement for debt principal totaled $135 million . 29 Table of Contents In connection with our 50 percent indirect interest in Crowley Blue Water Partners, we have agreed to provide a conditional guarantee of up to 50 percent of its outstanding debt balance in the event there is no charter agreement in place with an investment grade customer for the entity’s three vessels as well as other financial support in certain circumstances. As of March 31, 2019 , our maximum potential undiscounted payments under this arrangement was $125 million . Marathon Oil indemnifications — In conjunction with our spinoff from Marathon Oil, we have entered into arrangements with Marathon Oil providing indemnities and guarantees with recorded values of $1 million as of March 31, 2019 , which consist of unrecognized tax benefits related to MPC, its consolidated subsidiaries and the refining, marketing and transportation business operations prior to our spinoff which are not already reflected in the unrecognized tax benefits described in Note 11 , and other contingent liabilities Marathon Oil may incur related to taxes. Furthermore, the separation and distribution agreement and other agreements with Marathon Oil to effect our spinoff provide for cross-indemnities between Marathon Oil and us. In general, Marathon Oil is required to indemnify us for any liabilities relating to Marathon Oil’s historical oil and gas exploration and production operations, oil sands mining operations and integrated gas operations, and we are required to indemnify Marathon Oil for any liabilities relating to Marathon Oil’s historical refining, marketing and transportation operations. The terms of these indemnifications are indefinite and the amounts are not capped. Other guarantees —We have entered into other guarantees with maximum potential undiscounted payments totaling $123 million as of March 31, 2019 , which primarily consist of a commitment to contribute cash to an equity method investee for certain catastrophic events, in lieu of procuring insurance coverage, a commitment to fund a share of the bonds issued by a government entity for construction of public utilities in the event that other industrial users of the facility default on their utility payments and leases of assets containing general lease indemnities and guaranteed residual values. See Note 5 for information regarding our guarantee of certain borrowings under the ANDX dropdown credit facility. General guarantees associated with dispositions —Over the years, we have sold various assets in the normal course of our business. Certain of the related agreements contain performance and general guarantees, including guarantees regarding inaccuracies in representations, warranties, covenants and agreements, and environmental and general indemnifications that require us to perform upon the occurrence of a triggering event or condition. These guarantees and indemnifications are part of the normal course of selling assets. We are typically not able to calculate the maximum potential amount of future payments that could be made under such contractual provisions because of the variability inherent in the guarantees and indemnities. Most often, the nature of the guarantees and indemnities is such that there is no appropriate method for quantifying the exposure because the underlying triggering event has little or no past experience upon which a reasonable prediction of the outcome can be based. Contractual Commitments and Contingencies At March 31, 2019 , our contractual commitments to acquire property, plant and equipment and advance funds to equity method investees totaled $1.06 billion . Certain natural gas processing and gathering arrangements require us to construct natural gas processing plants, natural gas gathering pipelines and NGL pipelines and contain certain fees and charges if specified construction milestones are not achieved for reasons other than force majeure. In certain cases, certain producer customers may have the right to cancel the processing arrangements with us if there are significant delays that are not due to force majeure. 25 . SUBSEQUENT EVENT On May 8, 2019, MPC, MPLX and ANDX announced that MPLX and ANDX have entered into a definitive merger agreement whereby MPLX will acquire ANDX in a unit-for-unit transaction. Under the terms of the merger agreement, ANDX public unitholders will receive 1.135 MPLX common units for each ANDX common unit held and MPC will receive 1.0328 MPLX common units for each ANDX common unit held. As described in Notes 4 and 5 , we consolidate ANDX in accordance with ASC 810 and previously recorded ANDX’s assets and liabilities to our balance sheet at preliminary fair values as of the Andeavor acquisition date of October 1, 2018. Upon closing of this merger, we will account for the unit-for-unit transaction as a common control transaction, which will result in a change in our noncontrolling interest and additional paid-in capital. The transaction has been approved by MPLX’s and ANDX’s respective Conflicts Committees and both Boards of Directors. Subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions and receipt of regulatory approvals, the transaction is expected to close in the second half of 2019. 30 Table of Contents ITEM 2. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS This section should also be read in conjunction with the unaudited consolidated financial statements and accompanying footnotes included under Item 1. Financial Statements and in conjunction with our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018 . All statements in this section, other than statements of historical fact, are forward-looking statements that are inherently uncertain. You can identify our forward-looking statements by words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “design,” “estimate,” “expect,” “forecast,” “goal,” “guidance,” “imply,” “intend,” “may,” “objective,” “opportunity,” “outlook,” “plan,” “position,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “prospective,” “pursue,” “seek,” “should,” “strategy,” “target,” “will,” “would” or other similar expressions that convey the uncertainty of future events or outcomes. In accordance with “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, these statements are accompanied by cautionary language identifying important factors, though not necessarily all such factors, that could cause future outcomes to differ materially from those set forth in the forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements that relate to, or statements that are subject to risks, contingencies or uncertainties that relate to: Our forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and you should not rely unduly on them, as they involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that we cannot predict. Material differences between actual results and any future performance suggested in our forward-looking statements could result from a variety of factors, including the following: 31 Table of Contents We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements except to the extent required by applicable law. 32 Table of Contents CORPORATE OVERVIEW We are a leading, integrated, downstream energy company. We own and operate the nation’s largest refining system with more than 3 million barrels per calendar day of crude oil capacity across 16 refineries, located in the West Coast, Mid-Continent and Gulf Coast regions of the United States. Our refineries supply refined products to wholesale marketing customers domestically and internationally, to buyers on the spot market, to consumers through our Retail business segment and to independent entrepreneurs who operate branded outlets. We believe we are one of the largest wholesale suppliers of gasoline and distillates to resellers in the United States. We have three strong brands: Marathon ® , Speedway ® and ARCO ® . Approximately 6,900 branded outlets, primarily carrying the Marathon brand name, are operated by independent entrepreneurs in 35 states, the District of Columbia and Mexico. We believe our Retail segment operates the second largest chain of company-owned and operated retail transportation fuel and convenience stores in the United States, with approximately 3,920 convenience stores. Our Retail segment also sells transportation fuel to consumers through approximately 1,060 direct dealer locations. Our company-owned and operated locations primarily carry the Speedway ® brand name and the direct dealer locations carry the ARCO ® brand name. We are one of the largest midstream operators in North America. We primarily conduct our midstream operations through our ownership interests in MPLX and ANDX, which own and operate crude oil and light product transportation and logistics infrastructure as well as gathering, processing, and fractionation assets. As of March 31, 2019 , we owned, leased or had ownership interests in approximately 16,600 miles of crude oil and refined product pipelines to deliver crude oil to our refineries and other locations and refined products to wholesale and retail market areas. We distribute our refined products through one of the largest terminal operations in the United States and one of the largest private domestic fleets of inland petroleum product barges. Our integrated midstream gathering and processing network links producers of natural gas and NGLs from some of the largest supply basins in the United States to domestic and international markets. Our midstream gathering and processing operations include: natural gas gathering, processing and transportation; and NGL gathering, transportation, fractionation, storage and marketing. As of March 31, 2019 , our assets include approximately 9.9 bcf/d of gathering capacity, 11.1 bcf/d of natural gas processing capacity and 790 mbpd of fractionation capacity. At March 31, 2019 , our operations consisted of three reportable segments: Refining & Marketing; Retail; and Midstream. Each of these segments is organized and managed based upon the nature of the products and services it offers. Recent Developments On May 8, 2019, MPC, MPLX and ANDX announced that MPLX and ANDX have entered into a definitive merger agreement whereby MPLX will acquire ANDX in a unit-for-unit transaction at a blended exchange ratio of 1.07x. Under the terms of the merger agreement, ANDX public unitholders will receive 1.135 MPLX common units for each ANDX common unit held, representing a premium of 7.3 percent, and MPC will receive 1.0328 MPLX common units for each ANDX common unit held, representing a 2.4 percent discount, based on May 2, 2019 closing prices. As described in Notes 4 and 5, we consolidate ANDX in accordance with ASC 810 and previously recorded ANDX’s assets and liabilities to our balance sheet at preliminary fair values as of the Andeavor acquisition date of October 1, 2018. Upon closing of this merger, we will account for the unit-for-unit transaction as a common control transaction, which will result in a change in our noncontrolling interest and additional paid-in capital. The anticipated transaction simplifies MPLX and ANDX into a single listed entity to create a leading, large-scale, diversified midstream company anchored by fee-based cash flows. The combined entity will have an expanded geographic footprint that is expected to enhance its long-term growth opportunities and the sustainable cash flow profile of the business. 33 Table of Contents The transaction has been approved by MPLX’s and ANDX’s respective Conflicts Committees and both Boards of Directors. Subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions and receipt of regulatory approvals, the transaction is expected to close in the second half of 2019. The above discussion contains forward-looking statements with respect to the proposed transaction between MPLX and ANDX. Factors that could affect the proposed transaction between MPLX and ANDX include, but are not limited to, the ability to complete the proposed transaction between MPLX and ANDX on the proposed terms and timetable; the ability to satisfy various conditions to the closing of the transaction contemplated by the merger agreement; the ability to obtain regulatory approvals for the proposed transaction on the proposed terms and schedule, and any conditions imposed on the combined entity in connection with the consummation of the proposed transaction; the risk that anticipated opportunities and any other synergies from or anticipated benefits of the proposed transaction may not be fully realized or may take longer to realize than expected, including whether the proposed transaction will be accretive within the expected timeframe or at all; disruption from the proposed transaction making it more difficult to maintain relationships with customers, employees or suppliers; other risk factors inherent to MPLX’s and ANDX’s industry; and risks related to MPC. For additional information on forward-looking statements and risks that can affect our business, see “Disclosures Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” herein, together with Item 1A. Risk Factors in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018. 34 Table of Contents EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Results Select results are reflected in the following table. Our results include the results of Andeavor from the October 1, 2018 acquisition date forward. Net income (loss) attributable to MPC was $(7) million , or $(0.01) per diluted share, in the first quarter of 2019 compared to $37 million , or $0.08 per diluted share, for the first quarter of 2018 . Increased income from operations was more than offset by increased net interest and other financial costs, provision for income taxes and net income attributable to noncontrolling interests. Refer to the Results of Operations section for a discussion of consolidated financial results and segment results for the first quarter of 2019 as compared to the first quarter of 2018 . Andeavor Acquisition On October 1, 2018, we completed the Andeavor acquisition. Andeavor stockholders received in the aggregate approximately 239.8 million shares of MPC common stock valued at $19.8 billion and approximately $3.5 billion in cash in connection with the Andeavor acquisition. Andeavor was a highly integrated marketing, logistics and refining company operating primarily in the Western and Mid-Continent United States. Andeavor’s operations included procuring crude oil from its source or from other third parties, transporting the crude oil to one of its 10 refineries, and producing, marketing and distributing refined products. Its marketing system included more than 3,300 stations marketed under multiple well-known fuel brands including ARCO ® . Also, we acquired the general partner and 156 million common units of ANDX, which is a publicly traded limited partnership that was formed to own, operate, develop and acquire logistics assets. Its assets are integral to the success of our refining and marketing operations and are used to gather crude oil, natural gas, and water, process natural gas and distribute, transport and store crude oil and refined products. This transaction combined two strong, complementary companies to create a leading nationwide U.S. downstream energy company. The acquisition substantially increases our geographic diversification and scale and strengthens each of our operating segments by diversifying our refining portfolio into attractive markets and increasing access to advantaged feedstocks, enhancing our midstream footprint in the Permian Basin, and creating a nationwide retail and marketing portfolio all of which is expected to substantially improve efficiencies and our ability to serve customers. We expect the combination to generate up to approximately $1.4 billion in gross run-rate synergies within the first three years, significantly enhancing our long-term cash flow generation profile. MPLX and ANDX On February 1, 2018, we contributed refining logistics assets and fuels distribution services to MPLX in exchange for $4.1 billion in cash and approximately 114 million newly issued MPLX units. Immediately following the dropdown, our IDRs were cancelled and our economic general partner interest was converted into a non-economic general partner interest, all in exchange for 275 million newly issued MPLX common units. MPLX financed the cash portion of the February 1, 2018 dropdown with its $4.1 billion 364 -day term loan facility, which was entered into on January 2, 2018. On February 8, 2018, MPLX issued $5.5 billion in aggregate principal amount of senior notes in a public offering. MPLX used $4.1 billion of the net proceeds of the offering to repay the 364-day term-loan facility. The remaining proceeds were used to repay outstanding borrowings under MPLX’s revolving credit facility and intercompany loan agreement with us and for general partnership purposes. 35 Table of Contents The following table summarizes the MPLX distributions we received in the three months ended March 31, 2019 and 2018 and ANDX distributions we received in the three months ended March 31, 2019 . We owned approximately 505 million MPLX common units at March 31, 2019 with a market value of $16.60 billion based on the March 29, 2019 closing price of $32.89 per common unit. On April 29, 2019 , MPLX declared a quarterly cash distribution of $0.6575 per common unit payable on May 15, 2019 . As a result, MPLX will make distributions totaling $523 million to its common unitholders. MPC’s portion of these distributions is approximately $332 million . We owned approximately 156 million ANDX common units at March 31, 2019 with a market value of $5.51 billion based on the March 29, 2019 closing price of $35.26 per common unit. On April 29, 2019 , ANDX declared a quarterly cash distribution of $1.03 per common unit payable on May 15, 2019 . As a result, ANDX will make distributions totaling $240 million to its common unitholders. MPC’s portion of this distribution is approximately $148 million , which is net of a $12.5 million quarterly waiver. This quarterly distribution waiver is scheduled to remain in effect through the quarter ending December 31, 2019. See Note 3 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements for additional information on MPLX and ANDX. Share Repurchases During the three months ended March 31, 2019 , we returned $885 million to our shareholders through repurchases of approximately 14 million shares of common stock at an average price per share of $62.98 . Since January 1, 2012, our board of directors has approved $18.0 billion in total share repurchase authorizations and we have repurchased a total of $13.98 billion of our common stock, leaving $4.02 billion available for repurchases as of March 31, 2019 . See Note 8 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements. Liquidity As of March 31, 2019 , we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $755 million , excluding MPLX and ANDX cash and cash equivalents of $93 million and $29 million , respectively, no borrowings and $32 million in letters of credit outstanding under our $6.0 billion bank revolving credit facilities and no borrowings outstanding under our $750 million trade receivables facility, resulting in cash and available liquidity of almost $7.5 billion . As of March 31, 2019 , MPLX had approximately $1.82 billion available through its bank revolving credit agreement and $1 billion available through its intercompany credit facility with MPC. As of March 31, 2019 , ANDX had approximately $696 million available through its bank revolving credit agreements and $500 million available through its intercompany credit facility with MPC. OVERVIEW OF SEGMENTS Refining & Marketing Refining & Marketing segment income from operations depends largely on our Refining & Marketing margin and refinery throughputs. Our Refining & Marketing margin is the difference between the prices of refined products sold and the costs of crude oil and other charge and blendstocks refined, including the costs to transport these inputs to our refineries and the costs of products purchased for resale. The crack spread is a measure of the difference between market prices for refined products and crude oil, commonly used by the industry as a proxy for the refining margin. Crack spreads can fluctuate significantly, particularly when prices of refined products do not move in the same relationship as the cost of crude oil. As a performance benchmark and a comparison with other industry participants, we calculate West Coast, Mid-Continent and Gulf Coast 3-2-1 crack spreads that we believe most closely track our operations and slate of products. The following are used for these crack-spread calculations: 36 Table of Contents Our refineries can process significant amounts of sweet and sour crude oil, which typically can be purchased at a discount to crude oil referenced in these crack spreads. The amount of these discounts, the sweet and sour differentials, can vary significantly, causing our Refining & Marketing margin to differ from crack spreads. In general, larger sweet and sour differentials will enhance our Refining & Marketing margin. Future crude oil differentials will be dependent on a variety of market and economic factors, as well as U.S. energy policy. The following table provides sensitivities showing an estimated change in annual net income due to potential changes in market conditions. In addition to the market changes indicated by the crack spreads, the sour differential and the sweet differential, our Refining & Marketing margin is impacted by factors such as: Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Costs of crude oil, refinery feedstocks and refined products are stated under the LIFO inventory costing method and aggregated on a consolidated basis for purposes of assessing if the cost basis of these inventories may have to be written down to market values. Refining & Marketing segment income from operations is also affected by changes in refinery direct operating costs, which include turnaround and major maintenance, depreciation and amortization and other manufacturing expenses. Changes in manufacturing costs are primarily driven by the cost of energy used by our refineries, including purchased natural gas, and the level of maintenance costs. Planned major maintenance activities, or turnarounds, requiring temporary shutdown of certain refinery operating units, are periodically performed at each refinery. Costs for planned turnaround, major maintenance and engineering projects are expensed in the period incurred. We have various long-term, fee-based commercial agreements with MPLX and ANDX. Under these agreements, MPLX and ANDX, which are reported in our Midstream segment, provide transportation, storage, distribution and marketing services to our Refining & Marketing segment. Certain of these agreements include commitments for minimum quarterly throughput and distribution volumes of crude oil and refined products and minimum storage volumes of crude oil, refined products and other products. Certain other agreements include commitments to pay for 100 percent of available capacity for certain marine transportation and refining logistics assets. Retail Retail segment profitability is impacted by fuel and merchandise margin. Fuel margin for gasoline and distillate is the price paid by consumers or direct dealers less the cost of refined products, including transportation, consumer excise taxes and bankcard processing fees (where applicable). Gasoline and distillate prices are volatile and are impacted by changes in supply 37 Table of Contents and demand in the regions where we operate. Numerous factors impact gasoline and distillate demand throughout the year, including local competition, seasonal demand fluctuations, the available wholesale supply, the level of economic activity in our marketing areas and weather conditions. The margin on merchandise sold at our convenience stores historically has been less volatile and has contributed substantially to our Retail segment margin. Our Retail convenience stores offer a wide variety of merchandise, including prepared foods, beverages and non-food items. Inventories are carried at the lower of cost or market value. Costs of refined products and merchandise are stated under the LIFO inventory costing method and aggregated on a consolidated basis for purposes of assessing if the cost basis of these inventories may have to be written down to market values. Midstream Our Midstream segment transports, stores, distributes and markets crude oil and refined products, principally for our Refining & Marketing segment. The profitability of our pipeline transportation operations primarily depends on tariff rates and the volumes shipped through the pipelines. The profitability of our marine operations primarily depends on the quantity and availability of our vessels and barges. The profitability of our light product terminal operations primarily depends on the throughput volumes at these terminals. The profitability of our fuels distribution services primarily depends on the sales volumes of certain refined products. The profitability of our refining logistics operations depends on the quantity and availability of our refining logistics assets. A majority of the crude oil and refined product shipments on our pipelines and marine vessels and the refined product throughput at our terminals serve our Refining & Marketing segment and our refining logistics assets and fuels distribution services are used solely by our Refining & Marketing segment. As discussed above in the Refining & Marketing section, MPLX and ANDX, which are reported in our Midstream segment, have various long-term, fee-based commercial agreements related to services provided to our Refining & Marketing segment. Under these agreements, MPLX and ANDX have received various commitments of minimum throughput, storage and distribution volumes as well as commitments to pay for all available capacity of certain assets. The volume of crude oil that we transport is directly affected by the supply of, and refiner demand for, crude oil in the markets served directly by our crude oil pipelines, terminals and marine operations. Key factors in this supply and demand balance are the production levels of crude oil by producers in various regions or fields, the availability and cost of alternative modes of transportation, the volumes of crude oil processed at refineries and refinery and transportation system maintenance levels. The volume of refined products that we transport, store, distribute and market is directly affected by the production levels of, and user demand for, refined products in the markets served by our refined product pipelines and marine operations. In most of our markets, demand for gasoline and distillate peaks during the summer driving season, which extends from May through September of each year, and declines during the fall and winter months. As with crude oil, other transportation alternatives and system maintenance levels influence refined product movements. Our Midstream segment also gathers and processes natural gas and NGLs. NGL and natural gas prices are volatile and are impacted by changes in fundamental supply and demand, as well as market uncertainty, availability of NGL transportation and fractionation capacity and a variety of additional factors that are beyond our control. Our Midstream segment profitability is affected by prevailing commodity prices primarily as a result of processing at our own or third‑party processing plants, purchasing and selling or gathering and transporting volumes of natural gas at index‑related prices and the cost of third‑party transportation and fractionation services. To the extent that commodity prices influence the level of natural gas drilling by our producer customers, such prices also affect profitability. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion includes comments and analysis relating to our results of operations. Our results include the results of Andeavor from the October 1, 2018 acquisition date forward. This discussion should be read in conjunction with Item 1. Financial Statements and is intended to provide investors with a reasonable basis for assessing our historical operations, but should not serve as the only criteria for predicting our future performance. 38 Table of Contents Consolidated Results of Operations Net income (loss) attributable to MPC decreased $44 million in the first quarter of 2019 compared to the first quarter of 2018 primarily due to an increase in income from operations more than offset by increases in net interest and other financial costs, provision for income taxes and net income attributable to noncontrolling interests. First Quarter 2019 Compared to First Quarter 2018 Revenues and other income increased $9.63 billion primarily due to: Costs and expenses increased $9.40 billion primarily due to: 39 Table of Contents Net interest and other financial costs increased $123 million primarily due to debt assumed in the acquisition of Andeavor and increased MPLX borrowings. Provision for income taxes increased $82 million primarily due to increased income before income taxes of $106 million and $36 million of state deferred tax expense recorded as an out of period adjustment related to the Andeavor acquisition. The combined federal, state and foreign income tax rate was 29 percent and 9 percent for the three months ended March 31, 2019 and 2018 , respectively. The effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2019 was greater than the U.S. statutory rate of 21 percent primarily due to $36 million of state deferred tax expense recorded as an out of period adjustment partially offset by permanent tax differences related to net income attributable to noncontrolling interests. The effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2018 was less than the U.S. statutory rate of 21 percent primarily due to certain permanent tax differences related to net income attributable to noncontrolling interests, state and local deferred tax benefits primarily resulting from the February 1, 2018 dropdown and GP/IDR Exchange and equity compensation. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests increased $64 million primarily due to net income attributable to noncontrolling interest in ANDX. Segment Results Refining & Marketing The following includes key financial and operating data for the first quarter of 2019 compared to the first quarter of 2018 . Our results include the results of Andeavor from the October 1, 2018 acquisition date forward. 40 Table of Contents 41 Table of Contents The following table presents certain benchmark prices in our marketing areas and market indicators that we believe are helpful in understanding the results of our Refining & Marketing segment. Following the acquisition of Andeavor in October 2018, we expanded the benchmark prices included in these tables to include market information for the West Coast region of the United States, including LA CARBOB and LA CARB diesel spot prices, ANS crude prices and a West Coast ANS 3-2-1 crack spread. However, since the results of the Andeavor businesses are only included in our results from October 1, 2018 forward, these market indicators did not affect our results for the first quarter of 2018. The benchmark crack spreads below do not reflect the market cost of RINs necessary to meet EPA renewable volume obligations for attributable products under the Renewable Fuel Standard. First Quarter 2019 Compared to First Quarter 2018 Refining & Marketing segment revenues increased $8.40 billion primarily due to higher refined product sales volumes, which increased 1,408 mbpd mainly due to the Andeavor acquisition on October 1, 2018, partially offset by decreased average refined product sales prices of $0.08 per gallon. Refining & Marketing segment loss from operations increased $201 million primarily driven by narrower crude discounts across our medium and heavy crude slate. Additionally, high industry gasoline inventories following the fourth quarter’s strong production environment resulted in weaker gasoline margins particularly in January of 2019. Based on the changes in the market indicators shown above, which use spot market values and an estimated mix of crude purchases and product sales, we estimate a positive impact of $1.41 billion on Refining & Marketing segment income from operations, largely driven by a $1.54 billion benefit from increases in sales volume. Differences in our results compared to these market indicators, including the effects of product price realizations, the mix of crudes purchased and their costs, market structure on our crude oil acquisition prices, RIN prices on the crack spread, and other items like refinery yields and other feedstock variances, had an estimated negative effect of $120 million on Refining & Marketing segment income in the first quarter of 2019 compared to the first quarter of 2018 . Refinery capacity utilization was 95 percent inclusive of turnaround activity during the first quarter of 2019 and crude oil throughputs increased 1,124 mbpd primarily due to the refineries acquired from Andeavor. 42 Table of Contents Refining & Marketing margin was $11.17 per barrel for the first quarter of 2019 compared to $10.58 per barrel for the first quarter of 2018 . Refinery direct operating costs decreased $0.02 per barrel. In the first quarter of 2019 , planned turnaround and major maintenance costs decreased $0.99 per barrel, largely attributable to lower turnaround costs at our Galveston Bay refinery partially offset by higher turnaround costs at our Los Angeles and Robinson refineries. In the first quarter of 2019 , other manufacturing costs were $0.94 per barrel higher primarily due to the refineries acquired in the Andeavor acquisition. Higher crude throughputs during the first three months of 2019 also reduced refinery direct operating costs per barrel. Other operating expenses totaled $1,308 million for the first quarter of 2019 as compared to $630 million for the first quarter of 2018 . These costs are primarily related to refined product distribution costs, including fees paid to our two sponsored master limited partnerships, MPLX and ANDX. Included in these costs were fees paid to MPLX of $609 million and $478 million for the first quarters of 2019 and 2018 , respectively. The higher fees charged by MPLX were primarily due to one additional month of services provided to the Refining & Marketing segment in the first quarter of 2019 following the February 1, 2018 dropdown of refining logistic assets and fuels distribution services to MPLX. The balance of the increase was mainly driven by the inclusion of other operating expenses for the refining and marketing operations acquired from Andeavor. Supplemental Refining & Marketing Statistics 43 Table of Contents Retail The following includes key financial and operating data for the first quarter of 2019 compared to the first quarter of 2018 . Our results include the results of Andeavor from the October 1, 2018 acquisition date forward. 44 Table of Contents First Quarter 2019 Compared to First Quarter 2018 Retail segment revenues increased $2.81 billion primarily due increased fuel and merchandise sales resulting from the Andeavor acquisition on October 1, 2018. The Andeavor acquisition added approximately 1,100 company-owned and operated locations along with long-term supply contracts for approximately 1,060 direct dealers locations. Fuel sales volumes increased 1.11 billion gallons, almost all of which was related to the acquisition, and average fuel sales prices increased $0.06 per gallon. Merchandise sales increased $284 million resulting from the contributions of the acquired businesses. Retail segment income from operations increased $75 million primarily due to higher light product and merchandise margins largely related to the addition of the legacy Andeavor retail operations as well as a $24 million year-over-year increase in MPC's legacy Speedway segment earnings. These increases were partially offset by an increase in operating expenses resulting from the locations acquired from Andeavor. The Retail fuel margin increased to 17.15 cents per gallon in the first quarter of 2019 compared with 15.61 cents per gallon in the first quarter of 2018 and the merchandise margin increased $88 million . Midstream The following includes key financial and operating data for the first quarter of 2019 compared to the first quarter of 2018 . Our results include the results of Andeavor from the October 1, 2018 acquisition date forward. 45 Table of Contents First Quarter 2019 Compared to First Quarter 2018 On February 1, 2018, we completed the dropdown of refining logistics assets and fuels distribution services to MPLX, which is reported in our Midstream segment. These new businesses were reported in the Midstream segment prospectively from February 1, 2018. Midstream segment revenue increased $845 million primarily due to the inclusion of ANDX revenues subsequent to the Andeavor acquisition on October 1, 2018. In addition, the first quarter of 2019 reflects a full quarter of fees charged for fuels distribution and refining logistics services provided to Refining & Marketing as compared to only two months of fees in the first quarter of 2018 following the February 1, 2018 dropdown to MPLX. Midstream segment income from operations increased $341 million largely due to contributions of $220 million from ANDX and a $121 million increase in Midstream segment results driven primarily by growth across MPLX’s businesses. Items not Allocated to Segments First Quarter 2019 Compared to First Quarter 2018 Corporate and other unallocated items increased $102 million largely due to increased costs and expenses for the combined company after the Andeavor acquisition. 46 Table of Contents Other unallocated items include a $207 million gain resulting from the agreements executed with Capline LLC to contribute our 33 percent undivided interest in the Capline pipeline system in exchange for a 33 percent ownership interest in Capline LLC. Other unallocated items also include transaction-related costs of $91 million associated with the Andeavor acquisition. The transaction-related costs recognized in the first quarter largely relate to the recognition of an obligation for vacation benefits provided to former Andeavor employees. Non-GAAP Financial Measures Management uses certain financial measures to evaluate our operating performance that are calculated and presented on the basis of methodologies other than in accordance with GAAP. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors and analysts to assess our ongoing financial performance because, when reconciled to its most comparable GAAP financial measure, they provide improved comparability between periods through the exclusion of certain items that we believe are not indicative of our core operating performance and that may obscure our underlying business results and trends. These measures should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP, and our calculations thereof may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. The non-GAAP financial measures we use are as follows: Refining & Marketing Margin Refining margin is defined as sales revenue less the cost of refinery inputs and purchased products and excludes any LCM inventory market adjustment. Retail Fuel Margin Retail fuel margin is defined as the price paid by consumers or direct dealers less the cost of refined products, including transportation, consumer excise taxes and bankcard processing fees (where applicable) and excluding any LCM inventory market adjustment. Retail Merchandise Margin Retail merchandise margin is defined as the price paid by consumers less the cost of merchandise. 47 Table of Contents LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Cash Flows Our consolidated cash and cash equivalents balance was approximately $877 million at March 31, 2019 compared to $1.69 billion at December 31, 2018 . Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, investing activities and financing activities are presented in the following table. Our cash flows reflect the results of the business acquired in connection with the Andeavor acquisition from October 1, 2018 forward. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $1.76 billion in the first three months of 2019 compared to the first three months of 2018 , primarily due to favorable changes in working capital of $1.40 billion and an increase in operating results. Changes in working capital exclude changes in short-term debt. Changes in working capital, excluding changes in short-term debt, were a net $470 million source of cash in the first three - months of 2019 compared to a net $933 million use of cash in the first three months of 2018 . For the first three months of 2019 , changes in working capital, excluding changes in short-term debt, were a net $470 million source of cash primarily due to the effects of increasing energy commodity prices at the end of the period on working capital. Accounts payable increased primarily due to an increase in crude prices. Current receivables increased primarily due to higher refined product and crude prices and higher crude sales volumes. Inventories decreased due to decreases in refined product and merchandise inventories partially offset by increases in crude and materials and supplies inventories. For the first three months of 2018, changes in working capital, excluding changes in short-term debt, were a net $933 million use of cash primarily due to the effect of decreases in volumes partially offset by increases in energy commodity prices at the end of the period on working capital. Accounts payable decreased primarily due to lower crude oil volumes purchased slightly offset by higher crude oil prices. Inventories decreased due to decreases in crude, refined products and materials and supplies inventories. Current receivables decreased primarily due to lower refined product volumes slightly offset by higher prices. 48 Table of Contents Net cash used in investing activities increased $742 million in the first three months of 2019 compared to the first three months of 2018 , primarily due to the following: The consolidated statements of cash flows exclude changes to the consolidated balance sheets that did not affect cash. A reconciliation of additions to property, plant and equipment per the consolidated statements of cash flows to reported total capital expenditures and investments follows. Financing activities were a net $920 million use of cash in the first three months of 2019 compared to a net $2.56 billion source of cash in the first three months of 2018 . Derivative Instruments See Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk for a discussion of derivative instruments and associated market risk. 49 Table of Contents Capital Resources Our liquidity totaled $7.47 billion at March 31, 2019 consisting of: Because of the alternatives available to us, including internally generated cash flow and access to capital markets and a commercial paper program, we believe that our short-term and long-term liquidity is adequate to fund not only our current operations, but also our near-term and long-term funding requirements, including capital spending programs, the repurchase of shares of our common stock, dividend payments, defined benefit plan contributions, repayment of debt maturities and other amounts that may ultimately be paid in connection with contingencies. We have a commercial paper program that allows us to have a maximum of $2.0 billion in commercial paper outstanding. We do not intend to have outstanding commercial paper borrowings in excess of available capacity under our bank revolving credit facility. As of March 31, 2019 , we had no commercial paper borrowings outstanding. See Note 17 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our debt. The MPC credit agreements contain representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and events of default that we consider usual and customary for agreements of these types. The financial covenant included in the MPC credit agreements requires us to maintain, as of the last day of each fiscal quarter, a ratio of Consolidated Net Debt to Total Capitalization (as defined in the MPC credit agreements) of no greater than 0.65 to 1.00. As of March 31, 2019 , we were in compliance with this financial covenant, with a ratio of Consolidated Net Debt to Total Capitalization of 0.22 to 1.00, as well as the other covenants contained in the MPC bank revolving credit facility. The MPLX credit agreement contains representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and events of default that we consider usual and customary for agreements of these types. The MPLX credit agreement includes a financial covenant that requires MPLX to maintain a ratio of Consolidated Total Debt (as defined in the MPLX credit agreement) as of the end of each fiscal quarter to Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the MPLX credit agreement) for the prior four fiscal quarters of not greater than 5.0 to 1.0 (or 5.5 to 1.0 during the six-month period following certain acquisitions). Consolidated EBITDA is subject to adjustments for certain acquisitions completed and capital projects undertaken during the relevant period. Other covenants restrict MPLX and/or certain of its subsidiaries from incurring debt, creating liens on assets and entering into transactions with affiliates. As of March 31, 2019 , MPLX was in compliance with this debt covenant, with a ratio of Consolidated Total Debt to Consolidated EBITDA of 3.85 to 1.0, as well as the other covenants contained in the MPLX credit agreement. The ANDX credit agreements contain certain representations and warranties, affirmative and restrictive covenants and events of default that we consider to be usual and customary for an agreement of this type, including a financial covenant that requires ANDX to maintain a Consolidated Leverage Ratio (as defined in the ANDX credit agreements) for the prior four fiscal quarters of no greater than 5.0 to 1.0 (or 5.5 to 1.0 for up to two fiscal quarters following certain acquisitions). Consolidated EBITDA used to calculate the Consolidated Leverage Ratio is subject to adjustments for certain acquisitions completed and capital projects undertaken during the relevant period. The covenants also restrict, among other things, ANDX’s ability and/or the ability of certain of its subsidiaries to incur debt, create liens on assets and enter into transactions with affiliates. As of March 31, 2019 , ANDX was in compliance with this debt covenant, with a Consolidated Leverage Ratio of 3.86 to 1.0, as well as the other covenants contained in the ANDX credit agreements. . 50 Table of Contents Our intention is to maintain an investment-grade credit profile. As of March 31, 2019 , the credit ratings on our senior unsecured debt were as follows. The ratings reflect the respective views of the rating agencies. Although it is our intention to maintain a credit profile that supports an investment-grade rating, there is no assurance that these ratings will continue for any given period of time. The ratings may be revised or withdrawn entirely by the rating agencies if, in their respective judgments, circumstances so warrant. None of the MPC credit agreements, the MPLX credit agreement, the ANDX credit agreements or our trade receivables facility contains credit rating triggers that would result in the acceleration of interest, principal or other payments in the event that our credit ratings are downgraded. However, any downgrades of our senior unsecured debt could increase the applicable interest rates, yields and other fees payable under such agreements. In addition, a downgrade of our senior unsecured debt rating to below investment-grade levels could, under certain circumstances, decrease the amount of trade receivables that are eligible to be sold under our trade receivables facility, impact our ability to purchase crude oil on an unsecured basis and could result in us having to post letters of credit under existing transportation services or other agreements. Capital Requirements Capital Spending MPC's capital investment plan for 2019 totals approximately $2.8 billion for capital projects and investments, excluding MPLX, ANDX, capitalized interest and acquisitions. MPC’s capital investment plan includes approximately $1.8 billion of growth capital and $1.0 billion of maintenance capital. This plan includes all of the planned capital spending for Refining & Marketing, Retail and Corporate as well as a portion of the planned capital investments in Midstream. MPLX’s capital investment plan for 2019 , excluding capitalized interest and acquisitions, includes $2.2 billion of organic growth capital and approximately $200 million of maintenance capital. ANDX’s capital investment plan for 2019 , excluding capitalized interest and acquisitions, includes $600 million of organic growth capital and approximately $100 million of maintenance capital. We continuously evaluate our capital plan and make changes as conditions warrant. Capital expenditures and investments are summarized by segment below. These amounts include capital spending and investments related to businesses acquired in connection with the Andeavor acquisition from October 1, 2018 forward. Capital expenditures during the three months ended March 31, 2019 were primarily for Midstream and Refining & Marketing segment projects. The Midstream segment capital investment plan includes projects for MPLX and ANDX. MPLX’s capital investment plan includes the addition of approximately 825 MMcf/d of processing capacity at five gas processing plants, two in the Marcellus and three in the Southwest, which expands MPLX’s processing capacity in the Permian Basin and the STACK shale play of Oklahoma. The MPLX capital investment plan also includes the addition of approximately 100 mbpd of fractionation capacity in the Marcellus and Utica basins and the continued expansion of MPLX’s marine fleet, long-haul crude 51 Table of Contents oil, natural gas and NGL pipelines as well as projects to increase its export capability. The ANDX capital investment plan includes the construction of additional crude storage capacity for unloading of marine vessels, the construction of crude gathering systems to provide connectivity to multiple long-haul pipelines and a pipeline interconnect project to provide direct connectivity between certain MPC refineries. The remaining Midstream segment’s capital expenditure projects relate to investments in equity affiliate pipelines, including our expected investments in the Gray Oak Pipeline, a new pipeline spanning from the West Texas Permian Basin to the Gulf Coast which is expected to be in service by the end of 2019. The Refining & Marketing segment capital investment plan includes projects focused on high-return investments in refinery optimization, production of higher value products, increased capacity to upgrade residual fuel oil and expanded export capacity. We also plan to continue investing in domestic light products supply placement flexibility. Other Capital Requirements During the three months ended March 31, 2019 , we made no contributions to our funded pension plans, however, we have required funding for the 2019 plan year of approximately $64 million and we may choose to make additional contributions to our pension plans. On April 24, 2019 , our board of directors approved a dividend of $0.53 per share on common stock. The dividend is payable June 10, 2019 , to shareholders of record as of the close of business on May 16, 2019 . We may, from time to time, repurchase our senior notes in the open market, in privately-negotiated transactions or otherwise in such volumes, at such prices and upon such other terms as we deem appropriate. Share Repurchases Since January 1, 2012, our board of directors has approved $18.0 billion in total share repurchase authorizations and we have repurchased a total of $13.98 billion of our common stock, leaving $4.02 billion available for repurchases at March 31, 2019 . The table below summarizes our total share repurchases for the three months ended March 31, 2019 and 2018 . See Note 8 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements for further discussion of the share repurchase plans. We may utilize various methods to effect the repurchases, which could include open market repurchases, negotiated block transactions, accelerated share repurchases or open market solicitations for shares, some of which may be effected through Rule 10b5-1 plans. The timing and amount of future repurchases, if any, will depend upon several factors, including market and business conditions, and such repurchases may be discontinued at any time. Contractual Cash Obligations As of March 31, 2019 , our contractual cash obligations included long-term debt, capital and operating lease obligations, purchase obligations and other long-term liabilities. During the first three months of 2019 , our long-term debt commitments decreased approximately $230 million due to interest payments made during the quarter partially offset by increased borrowings on the MPLX bank revolving credit facility and ANDX bank revolving credit facilities. There were no other material changes to our contractual cash obligations outside the ordinary course of business since December 31, 2018 . 52 Table of Contents Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements Off-balance sheet arrangements comprise those arrangements that may potentially impact our liquidity, capital resources and results of operations, even though such arrangements are not recorded as liabilities under U.S. GAAP. Our off-balance sheet arrangements are limited to indemnities and guarantees that are described below. Although these arrangements serve a variety of our business purposes, we are not dependent on them to maintain our liquidity and capital resources, and we are not aware of any circumstances that are reasonably likely to cause the off-balance sheet arrangements to have a material adverse effect on liquidity and capital resources. We have provided various guarantees related to equity method investees. In conjunction with our spinoff from Marathon Oil, we entered into various indemnities and guarantees to Marathon Oil. These arrangements are described in Note 24 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements. ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS AND COMPLIANCE COSTS We have incurred and may continue to incur substantial capital, operating and maintenance, and remediation expenditures as a result of environmental laws and regulations. If these expenditures, as with all costs, are not ultimately reflected in the prices of our products and services, our operating results will be adversely affected. We believe that substantially all of our competitors must comply with similar environmental laws and regulations. However, the specific impact on each competitor may vary depending on a number of factors, including the age and location of its operating facilities, marketing areas, production processes and whether it is also engaged in the petrochemical business or the marine transportation of crude oil and refined products. On March 3, 2014, the EPA signed the final Tier 3 fuel standards. The final Tier 3 fuel standards require, among other things, a lower annual average sulfur level in gasoline to no more than 10 ppm beginning in calendar year 2017. In addition, gasoline refiners and importers may not exceed a maximum per-gallon sulfur standard of 80 ppm while retailers may not exceed a maximum per-gallon sulfur standard of 95 ppm. From 2014 through 2018, we made approximately $490 million in capital expenditures to comply with these standards, and expect to make approximately $260 million in capital expenditures for these standards in 2019. There have been no significant changes to our environmental matters and compliance costs during the three months ended March 31, 2019 . CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES As of March 31, 2019 , there have been no significant changes to our critical accounting estimates since our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018 . ACCOUNTING STANDARDS NOT YET ADOPTED As discussed in Note 2 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements, certain new financial accounting pronouncements will be effective for our financial statements in the future. 53 Table of Contents ITEM 3. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK For a detailed discussion of our risk management strategies and our derivative instruments, see Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018 . See Notes 15 and 16 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements for more information about the fair value measurement of our derivatives, as well as the amounts recorded in our consolidated balance sheets and statements of income. We do not designate any of our commodity derivative instruments as hedges for accounting purposes. The following table includes the composition of net losses on our commodity derivative positions as of March 31, 2019 and 2018 , respectively. See Note 16 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements for additional information on our open derivative positions at March 31, 2019 . Sensitivity analysis of the effects on income from operations (“IFO”) of hypothetical 10 percent and 25 percent increases and decreases in commodity prices for open commodity derivative instruments as of March 31, 2019 is provided in the following table. We remain at risk for possible changes in the market value of commodity derivative instruments; however, such risk should be mitigated by price changes in the underlying physical commodity. Effects of these offsets are not reflected in the above sensitivity analysis. We evaluate our portfolio of commodity derivative instruments on an ongoing basis and add or revise strategies in anticipation of changes in market conditions and in risk profiles. Changes to the portfolio after March 31, 2019 would cause future IFO effects to differ from those presented above. Sensitivity analysis of the effect of a hypothetical 100-basis-point change in interest rates on long-term debt, including the portion classified as current and excluding finance leases, as of March 31, 2019 is provided in the following table. Fair value of cash and cash equivalents, receivables, accounts payable and accrued interest approximate carrying value and are relatively insensitive to changes in interest rates due to the short-term maturity of the instruments. Accordingly, these instruments are excluded from the table. 54 Table of Contents At March 31, 2019 , our portfolio of long-term debt was comprised of fixed-rate instruments and variable-rate borrowings. The fair value of our fixed-rate debt is relatively sensitive to interest rate fluctuations. Our sensitivity to interest rate declines and corresponding increases in the fair value of our debt portfolio unfavorably affects our results of operations and cash flows only when we elect to repurchase or otherwise retire fixed-rate debt at prices above carrying value. Interest rate fluctuations generally do not impact the fair value of borrowings under our variable-rate debt, but may affect our results of operations and cash flows. See Note 15 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements for additional information on the fair value of our debt. ITEM 4. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES Disclosure Controls and Procedures An evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13(a)-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended) was carried out under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our chief executive officer and chief financial officer. Based upon that evaluation, the chief executive officer and chief financial officer concluded that the design and operation of these disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of March 31, 2019 , the end of the period covered by this report. Internal Control over Financial Reporting and Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting During the quarter ended March 31, 2019 , there were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 55 Table of Contents PART II – OTHER INFORMATION ITEM 1. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS We are the subject of, or a party to, a number of pending or threatened legal actions, contingencies and commitments involving a variety of matters, including laws and regulations relating to the environment. In the first quarter of 2019, MPLX entered into an agreement to settle notices of violation received from the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection relating to earth disturbance activities in connection with construction of an NGL line. The $124,030 penalty payment is expected to be made in the second quarter of 2019. ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS There have been no material changes from the risk factors previously disclosed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018 other than the risks described below related to the pending MLP Merger. The pending merger between MPLX and ANDX (the “MLP Merger”) is subject to conditions, including certain conditions that may not be satisfied or completed on a timely basis, if at all. Failure to complete the MLP merger could have a material and adverse effect on us and, even if completed, the MLP merger may not achieve some or all of the anticipated benefits. On May 8, 2019, we, together with MPLX and ANDX, announced the MLP Merger. Completion of the MLP Merger is subject to a number of customary conditions set forth in the MLP Merger Agreement, including approval by a majority of ANDX’s unitholders, MPLX’s registration statement on Form S-4 having become effective under the Securities Act of 1933, the approval to list MPLX units issuable in connection with the MLP Merger on the New York Stock Exchange, the absence of any governmental order or law prohibiting the consummation of the MLP Merger, the accuracy of each party’s representations and warranties under the MLP Merger Agreement (subject to the materiality standards set forth in the MLP Merger Agreement), MPLX’s and ANDX’s performance of their respective obligations under the MLP Merger Agreement in all material respects, and the receipt by both parties from their respective counsels of a written opinion regarding the U.S. federal income tax treatment of the transaction. These and other conditions to the closing of the MLP Merger may not be fulfilled in a timely manner or at all, and, accordingly, the MLP Merger may be delayed or may not be completed. If the MLP Merger is not completed, our ongoing businesses may be adversely affected and, without realizing any of the benefits of having completed the MLP Merger, we will be subject to a number of risks, including the following: In addition, even if completed there can be no assurance that the MLP Merger will deliver the strategic, financial and operational benefits anticipated by us. ITEM 2. UNREGISTERED SALES OF EQUITY SECURITIES AND USE OF PROCEEDS The following table sets forth a summary of our purchases during the quarter ended March 31, 2019 , of equity securities that are registered by MPC pursuant to Section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. 56 Table of Contents ITEM 5. OTHER INFORMATION None 57 Table of Contents ITEM 6. EXHIBITS 58 Table of Contents SIGNATURES Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized. 59