10-Q 1 psx-2013930x10q.htm 10-Q PSX-2013/9/30-10Q Table of Contents UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q (Mark One) Phillips 66 (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) 3010 Briarpark Drive, Houston, Texas 77042 (Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code) 281-293-6600 (Registrant’s telephone number, including area code) Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.     Yes  [X]    No  [    ] Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files).     Yes  [X]    No  [    ] Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).  Yes  [    ]    No  [X] The registrant had 599,536,436 shares of common stock, $.01 par value, outstanding as of September 30, 2013 . Table of Contents PHILLIPS 66 TABLE OF CONTENTS Table of Contents PART I. FINANCIAL INFORMATION Item 1. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 1 Table of Contents See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 2 Table of Contents See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 3 Table of Contents See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 4 Table of Contents See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 5 Table of Contents Note 1— Separation and Basis of Presentation The Separation On April 4, 2012, the ConocoPhillips Board of Directors approved the separation of its downstream businesses (as defined below) into an independent, publicly traded company named Phillips 66.  In accordance with the Separation and Distribution Agreement, the two companies were separated by ConocoPhillips distributing to its stockholders all 625,272,302 shares of common stock of Phillips 66 after the market closed on April 30, 2012 (the Separation).  Each ConocoPhillips stockholder received one share of Phillips 66 stock for every two shares of ConocoPhillips stock.  Following the Separation, ConocoPhillips retained no ownership interest in Phillips 66, and each company has had separate public ownership, boards of directors and management. Basis of Presentation Prior to the Separation, our results of operations, financial position and cash flows consisted of ConocoPhillips' refining, marketing and transportation operations; its natural gas gathering, processing, transmission and marketing operations, primarily conducted through its equity investment in DCP Midstream, LLC (DCP Midstream); its petrochemical operations, conducted through its equity investment in Chevron Phillips Chemical Company LLC (CPChem); its power generation operations; and an allocable portion of its corporate costs (together, the “downstream businesses”).  These financial statements have been presented as if the downstream businesses had been combined for all periods presented prior to the Separation.  All intercompany transactions and accounts within the downstream businesses were eliminated.  The statement of income for the period prior to the Separation includes expense allocations for certain corporate functions historically performed by ConocoPhillips and not allocated to its operating segments, including allocations of general corporate expenses related to executive oversight, accounting, treasury, tax, legal, procurement and information technology.  These allocations were based primarily on specific identification of time and/or activities associated with the downstream businesses, employee headcount or capital expenditures, and our management believes the assumptions underlying the allocations were reasonable.  The combined financial statements may not necessarily reflect all of the actual expenses that would have been incurred had we been a stand-alone company during the period presented prior to the Separation.  All financial information presented after the Separation represents the consolidated results of operations, financial position and cash flows of Phillips 66.  Accordingly: 6 Table of Contents Effective January 1, 2013, we changed the organizational structure of the internal financial information reviewed by our chief executive officer, and determined this resulted in a change in the composition of our operating segments.  The primary effects of this reporting reorganization were: The new segment alignment is presented for the three- and nine-month periods ended September 30, 2013 , with the prior periods recast for comparability. Note 2— Interim Financial Information The interim financial information presented in the financial statements included in this report is unaudited and includes all known accruals and adjustments necessary, in the opinion of management, for a fair presentation of the consolidated financial position of Phillips 66 and its results of operations and cash flows for the periods presented.  Unless otherwise specified, all such adjustments are of a normal and recurring nature.  Certain notes and other information have been condensed or omitted from the interim financial statements included in this report.  Therefore, these interim financial statements should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included in our 2012 Annual Report on Form 10-K.  The results of operations for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2013 , are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected for the full year. Note 3— Variable Interest Entities (VIEs) In February 2013, we formed Phillips 66 Partners LP, a master limited partnership, to own, operate, develop and acquire primarily fee-based crude oil, refined petroleum product and natural gas liquids pipelines and terminals, as well as other transportation and midstream assets.  We consolidate Phillips 66 Partners as we determined that Phillips 66 Partners is a VIE and we are the primary beneficiary.  As general partner, we have the ability to control the financial interests, as well as the ability to direct the activities of Phillip 66 Partners that most significantly impact its economic performance.  See Note 23—Phillips 66 Partners LP for additional information. We hold significant variable interests in VIEs that have not been consolidated because we are not considered the primary beneficiary.  Information on these VIEs follows: Merey Sweeny, L.P. (MSLP) is a limited partnership that owns a delayed coker and related facilities at the Sweeny Refinery.  As discussed more fully in Note 6—Investments, Loans and Long-Term Receivables , in August 2009 a call right was exercised to acquire the 50 percent ownership interest in MSLP of the co-venturer, Petróleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA).  That exercise has been challenged, and the dispute is being arbitrated.  Because the exercise has been challenged by PDVSA, we continue to use the equity method of accounting for MSLP, and the VIE analysis below is based on the ownership and governance structure in place prior to the exercise of the call right.  MSLP is a VIE because, in securing lender consents in connection with the Separation, we provided a 100 percent debt guarantee to the lender of the 8.85% senior notes issued by MSLP.  PDVSA did not participate in the debt guarantee.  In our VIE assessment, this disproportionate debt guarantee, plus other liquidity support provided jointly by us and PDVSA independently of equity ownership, results in MSLP not being exposed to all potential losses.  We have determined we are not the primary beneficiary while our call exercise is in dispute because under the partnership agreement the co-venturers jointly direct the activities of MSLP that most significantly impact economic performance.  At September 30, 2013 , our maximum exposure to loss represented the outstanding principal debt balance of $224 million .  The book value of our investment in MSLP at September 30, 2013 , was $78 million . We have a 50 percent ownership interest with a 50 percent governance interest in Excel Paralubes (Excel).  Excel is a VIE because, in securing lender consents in connection with the Separation, ConocoPhillips provided a 50 percent debt guarantee to the lender of the 7.43% senior secured bonds issued by Excel.  We provided a full indemnity to ConocoPhillips for this debt guarantee.  Our co-venturer did not participate in the debt guarantee.  In our assessment of the VIE, this debt guarantee, plus other liquidity support up to $60 million provided jointly by us and our co-venturer independently of equity ownership, results in Excel not being exposed to all potential losses.  We have determined we are not the primary beneficiary because we and our co-venturer jointly direct the activities of Excel that most significantly impact economic performance.  We continue to use 7 Table of Contents equity method accounting for this investment.  At September 30, 2013 , our maximum exposure to loss represented 50 percent of the outstanding principal debt balance of $140 million , or $70 million , plus half of the $60 million liquidity support, or $30 million .  The book value of our investment in Excel at September 30, 2013 , was $135 million . During October 2013, we entered into a multi-year consignment fuels agreement with a marketer who we currently support with debt guarantees.  Pursuant to the consignment fuels agreement, we will purchase the marketer’s fuels inventory, control the fuel marketing at each site and pay a fixed monthly fee to the marketer.  We determined the consignment fuels agreement and the debt guarantees together create a variable interest in the marketer with the marketer not being exposed to all potential losses.  We determined we are not the primary beneficiary because we do not have the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the economic performance of the marketer or its service stations.  We have no ownership interest in the marketer.  Our maximum exposure to loss represented the outstanding debt balance of $190 million and the fixed annual contractual payments under the consignment fuels agreement of $80 million . Note 4— Inventories Inventories consisted of the following: Inventories valued on the last-in, first-out (LIFO) basis totaled $4,341 million and $2,987 million at September 30, 2013 , and December 31, 2012 , respectively.  The estimated excess of current replacement cost over LIFO cost of inventories amounted to approximately $8,000 million and $7,700 million at September 30, 2013 , and December 31, 2012 , respectively. Our planned year-to-date reductions in inventory caused liquidations of LIFO inventory values.  These liquidations increased net income by approximately $2 million and $19 million during the three- and nine-month periods ended September 30, 2013 , and $1 million and $86 million , respectively, for the comparable periods of 2012. Note 5— Assets Held for Sale or Sold In July 2013, we completed the sale of the Immingham Combined Heat and Power Plant (ICHP), which was included in our M&S segment.  At the time of the disposition, ICHP had a net carrying value of $762 million , which primarily included $724 million of net properties, plants and equipment (PP&E), $110 million of allocated goodwill, and $111 million of deferred tax liabilities.  A before-tax gain of $323 million was deferred due to an indemnity provided to the buyer.  Absent claims under the indemnity, the deferred gain will be recognized into earnings as our exposure under this indemnity declines. In May 2013, we sold our E-Gas™ Technology business.  The business was included in our M&S segment and at the time of disposition had a net carrying value of approximately $13 million , including a goodwill allocation.  A $48 million before-tax gain is included in the "Net gain (loss) on dispositions" line of our consolidated statement of income. In June 2012, we sold our refinery located on the Delaware River in Trainer, Pennsylvania with a net carrying value of $38 million , including a goodwill allocation.  The refinery and associated terminal and pipeline assets were included in our Refining segment.  The $189 million before-tax gain is included in the “Net gain (loss) on dispositions” line of our consolidated statement of income. 8 Table of Contents Note 6— Investments, Loans and Long-Term Receivables Equity Investments Summarized 100 percent financial information for WRB Refining LP and CPChem was as follows: Loans and Long-Term Receivables In 2012, we entered into a market-based shareholder financing agreement for up to $ 100 million with the Malaysian Refining Company Sdn. Bhd. (MRC), all of which was drawn as of December 31, 2012.  MRC repaid this advance during the first half of 2013, and subsequently drew additional funds during the third quarter of 2013.  As of September 30, 2013, the balance on the facility was $65 million .  The advances to MRC are recorded as short-term related party advances with interest income recorded in equity earnings to offset the corresponding interest expense by MRC. Other MSLP owns a delayed coker and related facilities at the Sweeny Refinery.  MSLP processes long residue, which is produced from heavy sour crude oil, for a processing fee.  Fuel-grade petroleum coke is produced as a by-product and becomes the property of MSLP.  Prior to August 28, 2009, MSLP was owned 50 / 50 by ConocoPhillips and PDVSA.  Under the agreements that govern the relationships between the partners, certain defaults by PDVSA with respect to supply of crude oil to the Sweeny Refinery triggered the right to acquire PDVSA’s 50 percent ownership interest in MSLP, which was exercised on August 28, 2009.  PDVSA has initiated arbitration with the International Chamber of Commerce challenging the exercise of the call right and claiming it was invalid.  The arbitral tribunal held hearings on the merits of the dispute in December 2012, and post-hearing briefs were exchanged in March 2013.  We expect a final ruling in the fourth quarter of 2013.  We continue to use the equity method of accounting for our investment in MSLP. On July 1, 2013, we increased our ownership interest in WRB to 50 percent by purchasing ConocoPhillips' 0.4 percent interest. Note 7— Properties, Plants and Equipment Our investment in PP&E, with the associated accumulated depreciation and amortization (Accum. D&A), was: 9 Table of Contents Note 8— Goodwill Effective January 1, 2013, we realigned our operating segments and determined that goodwill (which, prior to the realignment, had been assigned 100 percent to our former R&M segment) should now be assigned to three of the realigned operating segments—Midstream, Refining and M&S.  We further determined that, for the Midstream segment, Transportation constituted a reporting unit.  For the Refining and M&S segments, we determined the goodwill reporting unit was at the operating segment level, due to the economic similarities of the components of those segments. Goodwill was reassigned to the realigned reporting units using a relative fair value approach.  Goodwill impairment testing was completed and no impairment recognition was required. In May 2013, $110 million of goodwill within the M&S segment was allocated to an asset held for sale.  The associated sale was completed in July 2013.  See Note 5—Assets Held for Sale or Sold for additional information. The carrying amount of goodwill was as follows: Note 9— Impairments The three- and nine-month periods ended September 30, 2013 and 2012 , included the following before-tax impairment charges: During the nine-month period of 2013 , we recorded a $15 million held-for-use impairment in our M&S segment, primarily related to PP&E associated with our planned exit from the composite graphite business. During the third quarter of 2012, we recorded an impairment of $43 million on the Riverhead Terminal in our Midstream segment.  During the same period, we recorded an incremental impairment of $205 million in our Midstream segment related to our investment in Rockies Express Pipeline LLC.  The total impairment charges related to this investment during the nine-month period of 2012 were $480 million .  In addition, the nine-month period of 2012 included a $42 million held-for-sale impairment in our Refining segment related to equipment formerly associated with the canceled Wilhelmshaven Refinery upgrade project. 10 Table of Contents Note 10— Earnings Per Share The numerator of basic earnings per share (EPS) is net income attributable to Phillips 66, reduced by noncancelable dividends paid on unvested share-based employee awards during the vesting period (participating securities).  The denominator of basic EPS is the sum of the daily weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the periods presented and fully vested stock and unit awards that have not yet been issued as common stock.  The numerator of diluted EPS is also based on net income attributable to Phillips 66, which is reduced only by dividend equivalents paid on participating securities for which the dividends are more dilutive than the participation of the awards in the earnings of the periods presented.  To the extent unvested stock, unit or option awards and vested unexercised stock options are dilutive, they are included with the weighted-average common shares outstanding in the denominator.  Treasury stock is excluded from the denominator in both basic and diluted EPS. On April 30, 2012, 625.3 million shares of our common stock were distributed to ConocoPhillips stockholders in conjunction with the Separation.  For comparative purposes, and to provide a more meaningful calculation of weighted-average shares outstanding, we have assumed this amount to be outstanding as of the beginning of each period prior to the Separation presented in the calculation of weighted-average shares.  In addition, we have assumed the fully vested stock and unit awards outstanding at April 30, 2012, were also outstanding for each of the periods presented prior to the Separation; and we have assumed the dilutive securities outstanding at April 30, 2012, were also outstanding for each period prior to the Separation. 11 Table of Contents Note 11— Debt During the second quarter of 2013, we amended our revolving credit agreement by entering into the First Amendment to Credit Agreement (Amendment).  The Amendment increased the borrowing capacity from $4.0 billion to $4.5 billion , extended the maturity from February 2017 to June 2018, reduced the margin applied to interest and fees accruing on and after the Amendment effective date, and made certain amendments with respect to Phillips 66 Partners. Also during the second quarter of 2013, we amended our trade receivables securitization facility by entering into the First Amendment to Receivables Purchase Agreement (Securitization Amendment).  The Securitization Amendment decreased the borrowing capacity from $1.2 billion to $696 million and made certain amendments with respect to Phillips 66 Partners. On June 7, 2013, Phillips 66 Partners entered into a senior unsecured $250 million revolving credit agreement (Revolver) with a syndicate of financial institutions.  On July 26, 2013, Phillips 66 Partners, in connection with its initial public offering of common units, closed on the facility.  Phillips 66 Partners has the option to increase the overall capacity of the Revolver by up to an additional $250 million , subject to certain conditions.  The Revolver has an initial term of five years.  As of September 30, 2013 , no amount had been drawn under this facility. During the third quarter of 2013, we entered into a capital lease which resulted in $177 million of debt being included on the balance sheet at September 30, 2013.  For additional information, see Note 16—Leases . We have no material scheduled debt maturities in 2013; however, in June 2013 we made a $500 million prepayment on our term loan and, in September 2013, prepaid the remaining balance of $500 million . At both September 30, 2013 , and December 31, 2012, we had no direct outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit agreement or our trade receivables securitization facility.  However, as of both September 30, 2013 , and December 31, 2012, $51 million in letters of credit had been issued that were supported by our revolving credit agreement.  As of September 30, 2013 , and December 31, 2012, $26 million and $166 million , respectively, in letters of credit had been issued that were collateralized by trade receivables held by a subsidiary under our trade receivables securitization facility.  Accordingly, as of September 30, 2013 , we had an aggregate $5.1 billion of total capacity available under these facilities. Note 12— Guarantees At September 30, 2013 , we were liable for certain contingent obligations under various contractual arrangements as described below.  We recognize a liability, at inception, for the fair value of our obligation as a guarantor for newly issued or modified guarantees.  Unless the carrying amount of the liability is noted below, we have not recognized a liability either because the guarantees were issued prior to December 31, 2002, or because the fair value of the obligation is immaterial.  In addition, unless otherwise stated, we are not currently performing with any significance under the guarantee and expect future performance to be either immaterial or have only a remote chance of occurrence. Guarantees of Joint Venture Debt In April 2012, in connection with the Separation, we issued a guarantee for 100 percent of the 8.85% senior notes issued by MSLP in July 1999.  At September 30, 2013 , the maximum potential amount of future payments to third parties under the guarantee is estimated to be $224 million , which could become payable if MSLP fails to meet its obligations under the senior notes agreement.  The senior notes mature in 2019. At September 30, 2013 , we had other guarantees outstanding for our portion of certain joint venture debt obligations, which have terms of up to 12 years.  The maximum potential amount of future payments under the guarantees is approximately $105 million .  Payment would be required if a joint venture defaults on its debt obligations. Other Guarantees We have residual value guarantees associated with leases with maximum future potential payments totaling approximately $246 million .  We have other guarantees with maximum future potential payment amounts totaling $293 million , which consist primarily of guarantees to fund the short-term cash liquidity deficits of certain joint ventures, guarantees of third parties related to prior asset dispositions, and guarantees of the lease payment obligations of a joint venture.  These guarantees generally extend up to 11 years or life of the venture. 12 Table of Contents Indemnifications Over the years, we have entered into various agreements to sell ownership interests in certain corporations, joint ventures and assets that gave rise to qualifying indemnifications.  Agreements associated with these sales include indemnifications for taxes, litigation, environmental liabilities, permits and licenses, supply arrangements, and employee claims; and real estate indemnities against tenant defaults.  The terms of these indemnifications vary greatly.  The majority of these indemnifications are related to environmental issues, the term is generally indefinite, and the maximum amount of future payments is generally unlimited.  The carrying amount recorded for indemnifications at September 30, 2013 , was $270 million .  We amortize the indemnification liability over the relevant time period, if one exists, based on the facts and circumstances surrounding each type of indemnity.  In cases where the indemnification term is indefinite, we will reverse the liability when we have information the liability is essentially relieved or amortize the liability over an appropriate time period as the fair value of our indemnification exposure declines.  Although it is reasonably possible future payments may exceed amounts recorded, due to the nature of the indemnifications, it is not possible to make a reasonable estimate of the maximum potential amount of future payments.  Included in the recorded carrying amount were $121 million of environmental accruals for known contamination that are included in asset retirement obligations and accrued environmental costs at September 30, 2013 .  For additional information about environmental liabilities, see Note 13—Contingencies and Commitments . Indemnification and Release Agreement In conjunction with, and effective as of, the Separation, we entered into the Indemnification and Release Agreement with ConocoPhillips.  This agreement governs the treatment between ConocoPhillips and us of aspects relating to indemnification, insurance, litigation responsibility and management, and litigation document sharing and cooperation arising in connection with the Separation.  Generally, the agreement provides for cross-indemnities principally designed to place financial responsibility for the obligations and liabilities of our business with us and financial responsibility for the obligations and liabilities of ConocoPhillips’ business with ConocoPhillips.  The agreement also establishes procedures for handling claims subject to indemnification and related matters. Note 13— Contingencies and Commitments A number of lawsuits involving a variety of claims that arose in the ordinary course of business have been filed against us or are subject to indemnifications provided by us.  We also may be required to remove or mitigate the effects on the environment of the placement, storage, disposal or release of certain chemical, mineral and petroleum substances at various active and inactive sites.  We regularly assess the need for accounting recognition or disclosure of these contingencies.  In the case of all known contingencies (other than those related to income taxes), we accrue a liability when the loss is probable and the amount is reasonably estimable.  If a range of amounts can be reasonably estimated and no amount within the range is a better estimate than any other amount, then the minimum of the range is accrued.  We do not reduce these liabilities for potential insurance or third-party recoveries.  If applicable, we record receivables for probable insurance or other third-party recoveries.  In the case of income-tax-related contingencies, we use a cumulative probability-weighted loss accrual in cases where sustaining a tax position is less than certain. Based on currently available information, we believe it is remote that future costs related to known contingent liability exposures will exceed current accruals by an amount that would have a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements.  As we learn new facts concerning contingencies, we reassess our position both with respect to accrued liabilities and other potential exposures.  Estimates particularly sensitive to future changes include contingent liabilities recorded for environmental remediation, tax and legal matters.  Estimated future environmental remediation costs are subject to change due to such factors as the uncertain magnitude of cleanup costs, the unknown time and extent of such remedial actions that may be required, and the determination of our liability in proportion to that of other responsible parties.  Estimated future costs related to tax and legal matters are subject to change as events evolve and as additional information becomes available during the administrative and litigation processes. Environmental We are subject to international, federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations.  When we prepare our consolidated financial statements, we record accruals for environmental liabilities based on management’s best estimates, using all information available at the time.  We measure estimates and base liabilities on currently available facts, existing technology, and presently enacted laws and regulations, taking into account stakeholder and business considerations.  When measuring environmental liabilities, we also consider our prior experience in remediation of contaminated sites, other companies’ cleanup experience, and data released by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or other organizations.  We consider unasserted claims in our determination of environmental liabilities, and we accrue them in the period they are both probable and reasonably estimable. 13 Table of Contents Although liability of those potentially responsible for environmental remediation costs is generally joint and several for federal sites and frequently so for state sites, we are usually only one of many companies alleged to have liability at a particular site.  Due to the joint and several liabilities, we could be responsible for all cleanup costs related to any site at which we have been designated as a potentially responsible party.  We have been successful to date in sharing cleanup costs with other financially sound companies.  Many of the sites at which we are potentially responsible are still under investigation by the EPA or the state agencies concerned.  Prior to actual cleanup, those potentially responsible normally assess the site conditions, apportion responsibility and determine the appropriate remediation.  In some instances, we may have no liability or may attain a settlement of liability.  Where it appears that other potentially responsible parties may be financially unable to bear their proportional share, we consider this inability in estimating our potential liability, and we adjust our accruals accordingly.  As a result of various acquisitions in the past, we assumed certain environmental obligations.  Some of these environmental obligations are mitigated by indemnifications made by others for our benefit and some of the indemnifications are subject to dollar and time limits. We are currently participating in environmental assessments and cleanups at numerous federal Superfund and comparable state sites.  After an assessment of environmental exposures for cleanup and other costs, we make accruals on an undiscounted basis (except those acquired in a purchase business combination, which we record on a discounted basis) for planned investigation and remediation activities for sites where it is probable future costs will be incurred and these costs can be reasonably estimated.  At September 30, 2013 , our consolidated balance sheet included a total environmental accrual of $505 million , compared with $530 million at December 31, 2012 .  We expect to incur a substantial amount of these expenditures within the next 30 years.  We have not reduced these accruals for possible insurance recoveries.  In the future, we may be involved in additional environmental assessments, cleanups and proceedings. Legal Proceedings Our legal organization applies its knowledge, experience and professional judgment to the specific characteristics of our cases, employing a litigation management process to manage and monitor the legal proceedings against us.  Our process facilitates the early evaluation and quantification of potential exposures in individual cases.  This process also enables us to track those cases that have been scheduled for trial and/or mediation.  Based on professional judgment and experience in using these litigation management tools and available information about current developments in all our cases, our legal organization regularly assesses the adequacy of current accruals and determines if adjustment of existing accruals, or establishment of new accruals, is required. Other Contingencies We have contingent liabilities resulting from throughput agreements with pipeline and processing companies not associated with financing arrangements.  Under these agreements, we may be required to provide any such company with additional funds through advances and penalties for fees related to throughput capacity not utilized. At September 30, 2013 , we had performance obligations secured by letters of credit of $1,337 million (of which $26 million were issued under the trade receivables securitization facility, $51 million were issued under the provisions of our revolving credit facility, and the remainder were issued as direct bank letters of credit) related to various purchase and other commitments incident to the ordinary conduct of business. Note 14— Derivatives and Financial Instruments Derivative Instruments We use financial and commodity-based derivative contracts to manage exposures to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices or to capture market opportunities.  Since we are not currently using cash-flow hedge accounting, all gains and losses, realized or unrealized, from commodity derivative contracts have been recognized in the consolidated statement of income.  Gains and losses from derivative contracts held for trading not directly related to our physical business, whether realized or unrealized, have been reported net in “Other income (loss)” on our consolidated statement of income.  Cash flows from all derivative activity for the periods presented appear in the operating section of the consolidated statement of cash flows. Purchase and sales contracts with fixed minimum notional volumes for commodities that are readily convertible to cash (e.g., crude oil and gasoline) are recorded on the balance sheet as derivatives unless the contracts are eligible for, and we elect, the normal purchases and normal sales exception (i.e., contracts to purchase or sell quantities we expect to use or sell over a reasonable period in the normal course of business).  We generally apply this normal purchases and normal sales exception to eligible crude oil, refined product, natural gas and power commodity purchase and sales contracts; however, we may elect not to apply this exception (e.g., when another derivative instrument will be used to mitigate the risk of the purchase or sales 14 Table of Contents contract but hedge accounting will not be applied, in which case both the purchase or sales contract and the derivative contract mitigating the resulting risk will be recorded on the balance sheet at fair value). Our derivative instruments are held at fair value on our consolidated balance sheet.  For further information on the fair value of derivatives, see Note 15—Fair Value Measurements . Commodity Derivative Contracts —We operate in the worldwide crude oil, refined products, natural gas liquids (NGL), natural gas and electric power markets and are exposed to fluctuations in the prices for these commodities.  These fluctuations can affect our revenues, as well as the cost of operating, investing and financing activities.  Generally, our policy is to remain exposed to the market prices of commodities; however, we use futures, forwards, swaps and options in various markets to balance physical systems, meet customer needs, manage price exposures on specific transactions, and do a limited, immaterial amount of trading not directly related to our physical business.  We also use the market knowledge gained from these activities to capture market opportunities such as moving physical commodities to more profitable locations, storing commodities to capture seasonal or time premiums, and blending commodities to capture quality upgrades.  Derivatives may be used to optimize these activities, which may move our risk profile away from market average prices. The following table indicates the balance sheet line items that include the fair values of commodity derivative assets and liabilities presented net (i.e., commodity derivative assets and liabilities with the same counterparty are netted where the right of setoff exists); however, the balances in the following table are presented gross.  For information on the impact of counterparty netting and collateral netting, see Note 15—Fair Value Measurements . Hedge accounting has not been used for any items in the table. The gains (losses) from commodity derivatives incurred, and the line items where they appear on our consolidated statement of income, were: Hedge accounting has not been used for any item in the table. 15 Table of Contents The table below summarizes our material net exposures resulting from outstanding commodity derivative contracts.  These financial and physical derivative contracts are primarily used to manage price exposure on our underlying operations.  The underlying exposures may be from non-derivative positions such as inventory volumes.  Financial derivative contracts may also offset physical derivative contracts, such as forward sales contracts.  As of September 30, 2013 , and December 31, 2012 , the percentage of our derivative contract volume expiring within the next 12 months was 99 percent for both periods. Credit Risk Financial instruments potentially exposed to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of over-the-counter (OTC) derivative contracts and trade receivables. The credit risk from our OTC derivative contracts, such as forwards and swaps, derives from the counterparty to the transaction.  Individual counterparty exposure is managed within predetermined credit limits and includes the use of cash-call margins when appropriate, thereby reducing the risk of significant nonperformance.  We also use futures, swaps and option contracts that have a negligible credit risk because these trades are cleared with an exchange clearinghouse and subject to mandatory margin requirements until settled; however, we are exposed to the credit risk of those exchange brokers for receivables arising from daily margin cash calls, as well as for cash deposited to meet initial margin requirements. Our trade receivables result primarily from the sale of products from, or related to, our refinery operations and reflect a broad national and international customer base, which limits our exposure to concentrations of credit risk.  The majority of these receivables have payment terms of 30 days or less .  We continually monitor this exposure and the creditworthiness of the counterparties and recognize bad debt expense based on historical write-off experience or specific counterparty collectability.  Generally, we do not require collateral to limit the exposure to loss; however, we will sometimes use letters of credit, prepayments and master netting arrangements to mitigate credit risk with counterparties that both buy from and sell to us, as these agreements permit the amounts owed by us or owed to others to be offset against amounts due us. Certain of our derivative instruments contain provisions that require us to post collateral if the derivative exposure exceeds a threshold amount.  We have contracts with fixed threshold amounts and other contracts with variable threshold amounts that are contingent on our credit rating.  The variable threshold amounts typically decline for lower credit ratings, while both the variable and fixed threshold amounts typically revert to zero if our credit ratings fall below investment grade.  Cash is the primary collateral in all contracts; however, many contracts also permit us to post letters of credit as collateral. The aggregate fair values of all derivative instruments with such credit-risk-related contingent features that were in a liability position were not material at September 30, 2013 , or December 31, 2012 . Note 15— Fair Value Measurements Fair Values of Financial Instruments We used the following methods and assumptions to estimate the fair value of financial instruments: 16 Table of Contents We carry certain assets and liabilities at fair value, which we measure at the reporting date using an exit price (i.e., the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability), and disclose the quality of these fair values based on the valuation inputs used in these measurements under the following hierarchy: We classify the fair value of an asset or liability based on the lowest level of input significant to its measurement; however, the fair value of an asset or liability initially reported as Level 3 will be subsequently reported as Level 2 if the unobservable inputs become inconsequential to its measurement or corroborating market data becomes available.  Conversely, an asset or liability initially reported as Level 2 will be subsequently reported as Level 3 if corroborating market data becomes unavailable.  We made no material transfers in or out of Level 1 during the nine-month periods ending September 30, 2013 and 2012. Recurring Fair Value Measurements Financial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value on a recurring basis consist primarily of investments to support nonqualified deferred compensation plans and derivative instruments.  The deferred compensation investments are measured at fair value using unadjusted prices available from national securities exchanges; therefore, these assets are categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy.  We value our exchange-traded commodity derivatives using closing prices provided by the exchange as of the balance sheet date, and these are also classified as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy.  When exchange-cleared contracts lack sufficient liquidity or are valued using either adjusted exchange-provided prices or non-exchange quotes, we classify those contracts as Level 2.  OTC financial swaps and physical commodity forward purchase and sales contracts are generally valued using quotations provided by brokers and price index developers such as Platts and Oil Price Information Service.  We corroborate these quotes with market data and classify the resulting fair values as Level 2.  In certain less liquid markets or for longer-term contracts, forward prices are not as readily available.  In these circumstances, OTC swaps and physical commodity purchase and sales contracts are valued using internally developed methodologies that consider historical relationships among various commodities that result in management’s best estimate of fair value.  We classify these contracts as Level 3.  Financial OTC and physical commodity options are valued using industry-standard models that consider various assumptions, including quoted forward prices for commodities, time value, volatility factors, and contractual prices for the underlying instruments, as well as other relevant economic measures.  The degree to which these inputs are observable in the forward markets determines whether the options are classified as Level 2 or 3.  We use a mid-market pricing convention (the mid-point between bid and ask prices).  When appropriate, valuations are adjusted to reflect credit considerations, generally based on available market evidence. The following tables display the fair value hierarchy for our material financial assets and liabilities either accounted for or disclosed at fair value on a recurring basis.  These values are determined by treating each contract as the fundamental unit of account; therefore, derivative assets and liabilities with the same counterparty are shown gross (i.e., without the effect of netting where the legal right of setoff exists) in the hierarchy sections of these tables.  These tables also show that our Level 3 activity was not material. We have master netting arrangements for all of our exchange-cleared derivative instruments, the majority of our OTC derivative instruments, and certain physical commodity forward contracts (primarily pipeline crude oil deliveries).  The following tables show these contracts on a net basis in the column “Effect of Counterparty Netting.”  We have no contracts that are subject to master netting arrangements that are reflected gross on the balance sheet. The carrying values and fair values by hierarchy of our material financial instruments, either carried or disclosed at fair value, and derivative assets and liabilities, including any effects of master netting agreements or collateral, were: 17 Table of Contents *Physical forward contracts may have a larger value on the balance sheet than disclosed in the fair value hierarchy when the remaining contract term at the reporting date is greater than 12 months and the short-term portion is an asset while the long-term portion is a liability, or vice versa. **We carry fixed-rate debt on the balance sheet at amortized cost. *Physical forward contracts may have a larger value on the balance sheet than disclosed in the fair value hierarchy when the remaining contract term at the reporting date is greater than 12 months and the short-term portion is an asset while the long-term portion is a liability, or vice versa. **We carry fixed-rate debt on the balance sheet at amortized cost. 18 Table of Contents Nonrecurring Fair Value Remeasurements The following table shows the values of assets, by major category, measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis in periods subsequent to their initial recognition during the nine-month periods ended September 30, 2013 and 2012 : *Represents the fair value at the time of the impairment. During the nine-month period ended September 30, 2013 , net PP&E held for use related to the composite graphite business in our M&S segment, with a carrying amount of $18 million , was written down to its fair value, resulting in a before-tax loss of $18 million .  Fair value was based on an internal assessment of expected discounted future cash flows.  During this same period, Corporate net PP&E with a carrying amount of $31 million was written down to its fair value of $22 million , resulting in a before-tax loss of $9 million .  The fair value was primarily determined by a third-party valuation. During the nine-month period ended September 30, 2012, net PP&E held for use related to a terminal and storage facility, with a carrying amount of $76 million , was written down to its fair value of $33 million , resulting in a before-tax loss of $43 million .  In addition, net PP&E held for sale related to equipment formerly associated with a canceled refinery upgrade project, with a carrying amount of $74 million , was written down to its fair value of $32 million , resulting in a before-tax loss of $42 million .  The fair values in each case were primarily determined by negotiated selling prices with third parties.  During this same period, our investment in a natural gas transmission pipeline was written down to a fair value of $283 million , resulting in a before-tax loss of $480 million .  The fair value was determined principally by the application of an internal discounted cash flow model using estimates of future production, prices, costs and a discount rate believed to be consistent with those used by principal market participants.  The decline in the fair value was considered to be other than temporary. Note 16— Leases In August 2013, we entered into a 20-year capital lease to continue our use of an oil terminal in the United Kingdom.  At September 30, 2013, $177 million of PP&E and debt obligations were recorded for this lease.  Future minimum lease payments under this lease are: 2014— $5 million ; 2015— $6 million ; 2016— $6 million ; 2017— $7 million ; 2018— $7 million ; and 2019 and after— $144 million .  In 2013, total payments under this lease are estimated to be $2 million . Note 17— Employee Benefit Plans Pension and Postretirement Plans Prior to the Separation, certain of our U.S. and U.K. employees participated in defined benefit pension plans and postretirement benefit plans (Shared Plans) sponsored by ConocoPhillips, which included participants of other ConocoPhillips subsidiaries.  We accounted for such Shared Plans as multiemployer benefit plans.  Accordingly, we did not record an asset or liability to recognize the funded status of the Shared Plans on our consolidated balance sheet until the Separation, at which time, the assets and liabilities of the Shared Plans which were allocable to our employees were transferred to us and we became the sponsor of the plans. 19 Table of Contents The allocated benefit cost from Shared Plans, as well as the components of net periodic benefit cost associated with plans sponsored by us for the three and nine months ended September 30, 2013 and 2012 , are shown in the table below: During the first nine months of 2013 , we contributed $136 million to our U.S. plans and $36 million to our international plans.  We currently expect to make additional contributions of approximately $20 million in the fourth quarter of 2013, primarily to our international plans. 20 Table of Contents Note 18— Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) The following table depicts changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss by component, as well as detail on reclassifications out of accumulated other comprehensive loss: *There were no significant reclassifications related to foreign currency translation or hedging. **These accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) components are included in the computation of net periodic benefit cost (see Note 17—Employee Benefit Plans , for additional information). Note 19— Cash Flow Information *Excludes our share of cash tax payments made directly by ConocoPhillips prior to the Separation. 21 Table of Contents Note 20— Related Party Transactions Significant transactions with related parties were: Also included in the table above are transactions with ConocoPhillips through April 30, 2012, prior to the Separation.  These transactions include crude oil purchased from ConocoPhillips as feedstock for our refineries and power sold to ConocoPhillips from our power generation facilities.  Sales to and purchases from ConocoPhillips, while it was a related party, were $381 million and $5,328 million , respectively, for the nine months ended September 30, 2012. For the period prior to the Separation, the consolidated statement of income includes expense allocations for certain corporate functions historically performed by ConocoPhillips and not allocated to its operating segments, including allocations of general corporate expenses related to executive oversight, accounting, treasury, tax, legal, procurement and information technology.  Net charges from ConocoPhillips for these services, reflected in selling, general and administrative expenses, were $70 million for the nine months ended September 30, 2012. 22 Table of Contents Note 21— Segment Disclosures and Related Information Effective January 1, 2013, we changed the organizational structure of the internal financial information reviewed by our chief executive officer, and determined this resulted in a change in the composition of our operating segments.  The primary effects of this reporting reorganization were: This realignment resulted in the following operating segments: Corporate and Other includes general corporate overhead, interest expense, our investments in new technologies and various other corporate activities.  Corporate assets include all cash and cash equivalents. We evaluate performance and allocate resources based on net income attributable to Phillips 66.  Intersegment sales are at prices that approximate market, except for certain 2012 transportation services provided by the Midstream segment to the Refining and M&S segments. The new segment alignment is presented for the three- and nine-month periods ended September 30, 2013 , with the prior periods recast for comparability. 23 Table of Contents Analysis of Results by Operating Segment 24 Table of Contents Note 22— Income Taxes Our effective tax rate for the third quarter and first nine months of 2013 was 35 percent and 34 percent , respectively, compared with 35 percent and 37 percent for the corresponding periods of 2012 .  The decrease in the effective tax rate for the first nine months of 2013 was primarily due to the absence of U.S. income tax expense on foreign dividends, the majority of which was recorded as a result of corporate restructuring to effectuate the Separation. Note 23— Phillips 66 Partners LP Initial Public Offering of Phillips 66 Partners LP In February 2013, we formed Phillips 66 Partners, a master limited partnership, to own, operate, develop and acquire primarily fee-based crude oil, refined petroleum product and natural gas liquids pipelines and terminals, as well as other transportation and midstream assets.  On July 26, 2013, Phillips 66 Partners closed its initial public offering of 18,888,750 common units at a price of $23.00 per unit, which included a 2,463,750 common unit over-allotment option that was fully exercised by the underwriters.  Phillips 66 Partners received $404 million in net proceeds from the sale of the units, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, structuring fees and offering expenses.  Headquartered in Houston, Texas, Phillips 66 Partners' initial assets consist of crude oil and refined petroleum product pipeline, terminal, and storage systems in the Central and Gulf Coast regions of the United States, each of which is integral to a connected Phillips 66-operated refinery. We own a 71.7 percent limited partner interest and a 2.0 percent general partner interest in Phillips 66 Partners, while the public owns a 26.3 percent limited partner interest.  We consolidate Phillips 66 Partners as a variable interest entity for financial reporting purposes (see Note 3—Variable Interest Entities (VIEs) for additional information).  The public's ownership interest in Phillips 66 Partners is reflected as a noncontrolling interest in our financial statements, including $408 million in the equity section of our consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2013 .  Phillips 66 Partners' cash and cash equivalents at September 30, 2013, were $422 million . Note 24— Condensed Consolidating Financial Information Our $5.8 billion of Senior Notes were issued by Phillips 66, and are guaranteed by Phillips 66 Company, a 100 -percent-owned subsidiary.  Phillips 66 Company has fully and unconditionally guaranteed the payment obligations of Phillips 66 with respect to these debt securities.  The following condensed consolidating financial information presents the results of operations, financial position and cash flows for: This condensed consolidating financial information should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes. 25 Table of Contents 26 Table of Contents 27 Table of Contents 28 Table of Contents 29 Table of Contents 30 Table of Contents Item 2.    MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Management’s Discussion and Analysis is the company’s analysis of its financial performance, financial condition, and of significant trends that may affect future performance.  It should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes.  It contains forward-looking statements including, without limitation, statements relating to the company’s plans, strategies, objectives, expectations and intentions that are made pursuant to the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.  The words “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “budget,” “continue,” “could,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “seek,” “should,” “will,” “would,” “expect,” “objective,” “projection,” “forecast,” “goal,” “guidance,” “outlook,” “effort,” “target” and similar expressions identify forward-looking statements.  The company does not undertake to update, revise or correct any of the forward-looking information unless required to do so under the federal securities laws.  Readers are cautioned that such forward-looking statements should be read in conjunction with the company’s disclosures under the heading: “CAUTIONARY STATEMENT FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE ‘SAFE HARBOR’ PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995,” beginning on page 46 . The terms “earnings” and “loss” as used in Management’s Discussion and Analysis refer to net income (loss) attributable to Phillips 66. BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT AND EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW Phillips 66 is an energy manufacturing and logistics company with midstream, chemicals, refining, and marketing and specialties businesses.  At September 30, 2013 , we had total assets of $51 billion .  Our common stock trades on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “PSX.” The Separation On April 4, 2012, the ConocoPhillips Board of Directors approved the separation of its downstream businesses (as defined below) into an independent, publicly traded company named Phillips 66.  In accordance with the Separation and Distribution Agreement, the two companies were separated by ConocoPhillips distributing to its stockholders all 625,272,302 shares of common stock of Phillips 66 after the market closed on April 30, 2012 (the Separation).  Each ConocoPhillips stockholder received one share of Phillips 66 stock for every two shares of ConocoPhillips stock.  Following the Separation, ConocoPhillips retained no ownership interest in Phillips 66, and each company has had separate public ownership, boards of directors and management. Basis of Presentation Prior to the Separation, our results of operations, financial position and cash flows consisted of ConocoPhillips' refining, marketing and transportation operations; its natural gas gathering, processing, transmission and marketing operations, primarily conducted through its equity investment in DCP Midstream, LLC (DCP Midstream); its petrochemical operations, conducted through its equity investment in Chevron Phillips Chemical Company LLC (CPChem); its power generation operations; and an allocable portion of its corporate costs (together, the “downstream businesses”).  Our financial statements have been presented as if the downstream businesses had been combined for all periods presented prior to the Separation.  All intercompany transactions and accounts within the downstream businesses were eliminated.  The statement of income for the period prior to the Separation includes expense allocations for certain corporate functions historically performed by ConocoPhillips and not allocated to its operating segments, including allocations of general corporate expenses related to executive oversight, accounting, treasury, tax, legal, procurement and information technology.  These allocations were based primarily on specific identification of time and/or activities associated with the downstream businesses, employee headcount or capital expenditures, and our management believes the assumptions underlying the allocations were reasonable.  The combined financial statements may not necessarily reflect all of the actual expenses that would have been incurred had we been a stand-alone company during the period presented prior to the Separation.  All financial information presented after the Separation represents the consolidated results of operations, financial position and cash flows of Phillips 66. 31 Table of Contents Effective January 1, 2013, we changed the organizational structure of the internal financial information reviewed by our chief executive officer, and determined this resulted in a change in the composition of our operating segments.  The primary effects of this reporting reorganization were: The new segment alignment is presented for the three- and nine-month periods ended September 30, 2013 , with the prior periods recast for comparability. Executive Overview We reported earnings of $535 million in the third quarter of 2013 and generated $1,949 million in cash from operating activities.  Proceeds from asset dispositions were $1,119 million in the quarter.  We used available cash to fund capital expenditures and investments of $412 million , pay dividends of $189 million , repurchase $674 million of our common stock, and reduce debt by $510 million.  We ended the third quarter of 2013 with $5.9 billion of cash and cash equivalents and approximately $5.1 billion of total capacity available under our liquidity facilities. In July 2013, Phillips 66 Partners LP, a master limited partnership we formed in February 2013, completed its initial public offering of 18,888,750 common units, raising net proceeds of $404 million.  Its assets consist of crude oil and refined petroleum product pipeline, terminal and storage systems in the Central and Gulf Coast regions of the United States, each of which is integral to a Phillips 66-operated refinery to which it is connected. Business Environment The Midstream segment includes our 50 percent equity investment in DCP Midstream.  Earnings of DCP Midstream are closely linked to natural gas liquids (NGL) prices, natural gas prices and crude oil prices.  Industry NGL prices increased in the third quarter of 2013, compared with the second quarter of 2013, due to relatively lower inventories primarily driven by increased NGL exports.  Industry NGL prices remained relatively flat compared with the third quarter of 2012.  Natural gas prices decreased in the third quarter of 2013, compared with the second quarter of 2013, while prices increased compared with the third quarter of 2012.  The decrease in natural gas prices as compared with the second quarter of 2013 was largely due to higher supply levels.  The increase in natural gas prices as compared with the third quarter of 2012 was largely due to increased demand and lower storage levels. The Chemicals segment consists of our 50 percent equity investment in CPChem.  The chemicals and plastics industry is mainly a commodity-based industry where the margins for key products are based on market factors.  The chemicals industry continues to experience higher ethylene margins in regions of the world where production is based upon NGL versus crude-derived feedstocks.  In particular, North American ethane-based crackers benefited from the lower-priced feedstocks and improved ethylene margins. Results for our Refining segment depend largely on refining margins, cost control, refinery throughput, and product yields.  The crack spread is a measure of the difference between market prices for refined petroleum products and crude oil, and it is used within our industry as an indicator for refining margins.  The U.S. 3:2:1 crack spread (three barrels of crude oil producing two barrels of gasoline and one barrel of diesel) decreased in the third quarter of 2013, compared with both the second quarter of 2013 and the third quarter of 2012.  The third-quarter 2013 domestic industry crack spread declines are largely the result of higher crude prices as West Texas Intermediate (WTI) and other crudes increased compared with both the second quarter of 2013 and third quarter of 2012.  In addition, the third-quarter 2013 domestic industry crack spread was negatively impacted compared with the third quarter of 2012, due to the reduction in gasoline and distillate prices. U.S. crude production continues to rise, with an approximately 300,000 barrels per day increase in the third quarter of 2013 compared with the second quarter of 2013, according to data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration.  The areas of largest production growth are Bakken/Three Forks and Eagle Ford, which contributed close to one-third of the aforementioned growth, with Permian and other tight oil plays (e.g., Niobrara, Mississippian Lime, Granite Wash) contributing the remainder.  Nationwide growth is also benefiting from slower decline rates in legacy production areas.  This strong production growth, however, did not pressure crude prices over the third quarter, as WTI continued to increase over the second quarter.  The spread to Brent over the quarter narrowed considerably.  The decreasing WTI-Brent differential stems from increased pipeline outlets from Cushing to the Gulf Coast, as well as unplanned Canadian upgrader outages that tightened light crude balances throughout the Midcontinent region. 32 Table of Contents The Northwest Europe benchmark crack spread in the third quarter of 2013 decreased compared with both the second quarter of 2013 and third quarter of 2012.  The benchmark crack spread in Northwest Europe for the third quarter of 2013 declined from the second quarter of 2013 as a result of weak gasoline prices due to poor domestic and export demand, compared with stronger crude prices after reduced supplies resulting from North Sea maintenance and Libyan civil unrest.  The Northwest Europe crack spread for the third quarter of 2013, compared with the third quarter of 2012, decreased as gasoline cracks fell on weakened demand and consistently high distillate imports. Results for our M&S segment depend largely on marketing fuel margins, lubricant margins and other specialty product margins.  These margins are primarily based on market factors, largely determined by the relationship between demand and supply.  Marketing fuel margins are primarily determined by the trend of the spot prices for refined products.  Generally, a downward trend of spot prices has a favorable impact on the marketing fuel margins, while an upward trend of spot prices has an unfavorable impact on marketing fuel margins. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has implemented a Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) pursuant to the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007.  The RFS program sets annual quotas for the quantity of renewable fuels (such as ethanol) that must be blended into motor fuels consumed in the United States.  To provide certain flexibility in compliance options available to the industry, a Renewable Identification Number (RIN) is assigned to each gallon of renewable fuel produced in, or imported into, the United States.  As a producer of petroleum-based motor fuels, we are obligated to blend renewable fuels into the products we produce at a rate that is at least commensurate to the EPA's quota and, to the extent we do not, we must purchase RINs in the open market to satisfy our obligation under the RFS program. During the first nine months of 2013, the monthly average price of ethanol-based RINs increased from approximately 10 cents per gallon of ethanol at the beginning of 2013 to approximately $1.15 per gallon in the beginning of the third quarter and then retracted to approximately 60 cents per gallon by the end of the third quarter.  This increase has been attributed to, among other items, the impending ethanol “blend wall”—the situation where the EPA's mandated quantities of ethanol to be blended exceeds 10 percent of produced gasoline.  While various options to address blend wall concerns have been proposed, such as statutory or regulatory amendments, it is unclear at this time whether and when any such option will be implemented.  It is also not possible to reliably determine how much of increased RIN costs may ultimately be included in the selling price of motor fuels.  Accordingly, the long-term impact of the EPA's RFS program on our refining margins is uncertain.  If sufficient quantities of RINs are unavailable for purchase or we are otherwise unable to meet the EPA's RFS quotas, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially adversely affected. 33 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Unless otherwise indicated, discussion of results for the three- and nine-month periods ended September 30, 2013 , is based on a comparison with the corresponding periods of 2012 . Consolidated Results A summary of net income (loss) attributable to Phillips 66 by business segment follows: Earnings for Phillips 66 decreased $1,064 million , or 67 percent , in the third quarter of 2013 and decreased $516 million , or 15 percent , in the nine-month period ended September 30, 2013 .  These decreases were primarily due to lower realized refining margins as a result of decreased market crack spreads and impacts related to tightened crude differentials, partially offset by lower impairments in our Midstream segment. See the “Segment Results” section for additional information on our segment results. Statement of Income Analysis Sales and other operating revenues for the third quarter of 2013 increased 3 percent , and purchased crude oil and products increased 7 percent , both primarily due to higher crude oil prices.  For the nine-month period of 2013 both sales and other operating revenues and purchased crude oil and products decreased 5 percent .  The decrease in sales and other operating revenues was primarily due to lower prices for petroleum products and lower crude supply volumes.  The decrease in purchased crude oil and products was largely due to lower crude supply volumes. Equity in earnings of affiliates decreased 33 percent and 8 percent for the three- and nine-month periods of 2013, respectively, which primarily resulted from decreased earnings from WRB Refining LP, partially offset by increased earnings from CPChem: Net gain (loss) on dispositions for the nine-month period of 2013 decreased $139 million, primarily reflecting a before-tax gain of $189 million from the sale of the Trainer Refinery and associated terminal and pipeline assets in the second quarter of 2012. Operating expenses for the third quarter of 2013 increased $103 million , or 12 percent , primarily due to spending related to turnarounds at our refineries, higher utility costs, and higher environmental expenses. 34 Table of Contents Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $78 million , or 18 percent , in the third quarter of 2013, primarily due to costs associated with the Separation and lower employee benefits.  Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $201 million , or 16 percent , in the first nine months of 2013 due to impacts related to a prior retail disposition program and costs associated with the Separation. Impairments decreased $247 million and $540 million in the third quarter and nine-month period, respectively, primarily due to impairments associated with our equity investment in Rockies Express Pipeline LLC.  For additional information on the impairments, see Note 9—Impairments , in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Interest and debt expense increased $37 million in the nine-month period of 2013, primarily due to increased average debt outstanding in 2013, reflecting the issuance of debt in March 2012 in connection with the Separation. See Note 22—Income Taxes , in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for information regarding our provision for income taxes and effective tax rates. 35 Table of Contents Segment Results Midstream *Based on index prices from the Mont Belvieu and Conway market hubs that are weighted by NGL component and location mix. *Pipelines represent the sum of volumes transported through each separately tariffed pipeline segment, including our share of equity volumes from Yellowstone Pipe Line Company and Lake Charles Pipe Line Company. * *Includes our share of equity affiliates. ***Excludes DCP Midstream. The Midstream segment purchases raw natural gas from producers and gathers natural gas through an extensive network of pipeline gathering systems.  The natural gas is then processed to extract NGL from the raw gas stream.  The remaining “residue” gas is marketed to electric utilities, industrial users and gas marketing companies.  Most of the NGLs are fractionated—separated into individual components such as ethane, propane and butane—and marketed as chemical feedstock, fuel or blendstock.  In addition, the Midstream segment includes transportation and terminaling services associated with the movement of crude oil, refined and specialty products, natural gas and NGL. The Midstream segment includes our 50 percent equity investment in DCP Midstream, as well as NGL fractionation, trading and marketing businesses in the United States.  In addition, the Midstream segment encompasses pipeline and terminal assets in the United States. Earnings from the Midstream segment increased $220 million in the third quarter of 2013 and $387 million in the nine-month period of 2013.  The improvements were primarily driven by higher earnings from our Transportation business and DCP Midstream, partially offset by lower earnings from NGL Operations and Other. Transportation earnings increased $182 million in the third quarter of 2013 and $395 million in the nine-month period of 2013. These increases primarily resulted from the 2012 impairments of our investment in Rockies Express Pipeline LLC, as well as increased throughput fees. 36 Table of Contents The $48 million increase in earnings of DCP Midstream during the third quarter of 2013 resulted from an increase in gains associated with unit issuances by DCP Midstream Partners, LP (DCP Partners) as described below.  In addition, higher commodity prices, lower operating costs and higher volumes benefited earnings.  During the nine-month period of 2013, earnings increased by $32 million primarily due to an increase in gains associated with unit issuances by DCP Partners, as described below, and lower operating costs.  These increases were partially offset by the impacts of asset dropdowns to DCP Partners.  See the “Business Environment and Executive Overview” section for information on market factors affecting NGL prices. DCP Partners, a subsidiary of DCP Midstream, issues, from time to time, limited partner units to the public.  These issuances benefited our equity in earnings from DCP Midstream, on an after-tax basis, by approximately $24 million and $56 million in the three- and nine-month periods ended September 30, 2013 , respectively, compared with approximately $9 million and $23 million in the corresponding periods of 2012. Earnings of our NGL Operations and Other businesses decreased $10 million and $40 million for the three- and nine-month periods ended September 30, 2013 , respectively.  These decreases were primarily due to inventory impacts; in addition, the third quarter of 2013 was impacted by lower margins. Chemicals The Chemicals segment consists of our 50 percent interest in CPChem, which we account for under the equity method.  CPChem uses NGL and other feedstocks to produce petrochemicals.  These products are then marketed and sold or used as feedstocks to produce plastics and other chemicals. Earnings from the Chemicals segment increased $109 million , or 71 percent , and $148 million , or 26 percent , in the three- and nine-month periods of 2013, respectively.  The increase in earnings was primarily driven by the absence of costs and interest associated with CPChem's retirement of $1.0 billion of debt in 2012, fixed asset impairments recorded in 2012, a higher tax provision due to repositioning in 2012, and improved realized margins.  These increases were partially offset by lower sales volumes and higher costs.  See the “Business Environment and Executive Overview” section for information on market factors impacting this quarter's results. 37 Table of Contents Refining 38 Table of Contents The Refining segment buys, sells and refines crude oil and other feedstocks into petroleum products (such as gasoline, distillates and aviation fuels) at 15 refineries, mainly in the United States, Europe and Asia. Earnings for the Refining segment decreased $1,547 million and $ 1,453 million in the three- and nine-month periods of 2013, respectively.  These decreases were primarily due to lower realized refining margins as a result of decreased market cracks and impacts related to tightened crude differentials.  See the “Business Environment and Executive Overview” section for information on industry crack spreads and other market factors impacting this quarter’s results. Our Refining segment continued to incur increased costs for RINs under the EPA's Renewable Fuel Standards Program.  To the extent these costs are not captured in the selling price of motor fuels, realized refining margins are reduced. Our worldwide refining crude oil capacity utilization rate was 95 percent in the third quarter of 2013 , compared with 96 percent in the third quarter of 2012 .  The current year decrease was primarily due to unfavorable market impacts, and higher turnaround activity, partially offset by lower unplanned downtime due to the absence of negative impacts from Hurricane Issac in the third quarter of 2012. Marketing and Specialties *On third-party petroleum products sales. The M&S segment purchases for resale and markets refined petroleum products (such as gasoline, distillates and aviation fuels), mainly in the United States and Europe.  In addition, this segment includes the manufacturing and marketing of specialty products (such as lubricants and flow improvers), as well as power generation operations. 39 Table of Contents The M&S segment earnings were $240 million in the third quarter of 2013, an increase of $142 million .  Earnings for the first nine months of 2013 were $760 million , an increase of $422 million .  See the “Business Environment and Executive Overview” section for information on marketing fuel margins and other market factors impacting this quarter's results. In both periods, the segment benefited from higher U.S. and International marketing margins and decreased costs.  U.S. M&S margins improved primarily due to the impact of higher RINs values associated with renewable fuels blending activities.  This more than offset weaker underlying U.S. marketing margins.  In addition, the nine-month period benefited from a lack of income taxes associated with foreign dividends during 2012 and the sale of our E-Gas TM Technology business in May 2013. Corporate and Other Net interest consists of interest and financing expense, net of interest income and capitalized interest.  Net interest decreased $6 million in the third quarter of 2013, while it increased $25 million in the nine-month period of 2013 .  The increase in the nine-month period of 2013 was primarily due to increased average outstanding debt in 2013, reflecting the issuance of debt in March 2012 in connection with the Separation. Corporate general and administrative expenses increased $2 million and $23 million in the three- and nine-month periods ending September 30, 2013 , respectively.  The increase in the nine-month period was primarily due to incremental costs and expenses associated with operating as a stand-alone company.  Repositioning costs decreased $13 million and $43 million in the three- and nine-month periods ending September 30, 2013 , respectively. The category “Other” includes certain income tax expenses, environmental costs associated with sites no longer in operation, foreign currency transaction gains and losses and other costs not directly associated with an operating segment. 40 Table of Contents CAPITAL RESOURCES AND LIQUIDITY Financial Indicators To meet our short- and long-term liquidity requirements, we look to a variety of funding sources, but rely primarily on cash generated from operating activities.  During the first nine months of 2013 , we generated $5.1 billion in cash from operations, received $1.2 billion from asset dispositions and received $0.4 billion as a result of net proceeds received from the issuance of Phillips 66 Partners' common units.  This available cash was primarily used for capital expenditures and investments ( $1.2 billion ), repurchases of our common stock ( $1.6 billion ), debt repayments ( $1.0 billion ) and dividend payments on our common stock ( $0.6 billion ).  During the first nine months of 2013 , cash and cash equivalents increased by $2.5 billion to $5.9 billion , of which $422 million is held by Phillips 66 Partners. In addition to cash flows from operating activities, we rely on our credit facility programs, asset sales and our shelf registration statement to support our short- and long-term liquidity requirements.  We believe current cash and cash equivalents and cash generated by operations, together with access to external sources of funds as described below in the “Significant Sources of Capital” section, will be sufficient to meet our funding requirements in the near and long term, including our capital spending, dividend payments, defined benefit plan contributions, repayment of debt and share repurchases. Significant Sources of Capital Operating Activities During the first nine months of 2013 , cash provided by operating activities was $5,130 million , compared with $2,991 million for the first nine months of 2012.  The improvement in the 2013 period reflected positive working capital impacts, driven by inventory management and timing of tax payments, and higher distributions from equity affiliates, partially offset by lower refining margins. Our short- and long-term operating cash flows are highly dependent upon refining and marketing margins, NGL prices, and chemicals margins.  Prices and margins in our industry are typically volatile, and are driven by market conditions over which we have little or no control.  Absent other mitigating factors, as these prices and margins fluctuate, we would expect a corresponding change in our operating cash flows. The level and quality of output from our refineries impacts our cash flows.  The output at our refineries is impacted by such factors as operating efficiency, maintenance turnarounds, market conditions, feedstock availability and weather conditions.  We actively manage the operations of our refineries and, typically, any variability in their operations has not been as significant to cash flows as that caused by margins and prices. Our operating cash flows are also impacted by dividend decisions made by our equity affiliates, including DCP Midstream, CPChem and WRB.  During the first nine months of 2013 , we received dividends of $ 2,228 million from our equity affiliates, compared with $ 1,580 million during the same period of 2012 .  We cannot control the amount of future dividends from equity affiliates; therefore, future dividend payments by these companies are not assured. 41 Table of Contents Asset Sales Proceeds from asset sales were $1,188 million in the first nine months of 2013, compared with $259 million in the first nine months of 2012.  Asset sales in the nine months ended September 30, 2013 , included the sale of a power plant in the United Kingdom, as well as our gasification technology, while asset sales in the corresponding period of 2012 primarily reflected the sale of a refinery and associated terminal and pipeline assets located in Trainer, Pennsylvania.  A before-tax gain of $323 million associated with asset sales in the third quarter of 2013 was deferred due to an indemnity provided to the buyer.  Absent claims under the indemnity, this deferred gain will be recognized into earnings as our exposure under the indemnity declines, which is currently expected to begin in the second half of 2014 and end in the first half of 2015. Initial Public Offering of Phillips 66 Partners LP In February 2013, we formed Phillips 66 Partners, a master limited partnership, to own, operate, develop and acquire primarily fee-based crude oil, refined petroleum product and natural gas liquids pipelines and terminals, as well as other transportation and midstream assets.  On July 26, 2013, Phillips 66 Partners closed its initial public offering of 18,888,750 common units at a price of $23.00 per unit, which included a 2,463,750 common unit over-allotment option that was fully exercised by the underwriters.  Phillips 66 Partners received $404 million in net proceeds from the sale of the units, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, structuring fees and offering expenses.  Headquartered in Houston, Texas, Phillips 66 Partners' initial assets consist of crude oil and refined petroleum product pipeline, terminal, and storage systems in the Central and Gulf Coast regions of the United States, each of which is integral to a connected Phillips 66-operated refinery. We own a 71.7 percent limited partner interest and a 2.0 percent general partner interest in Phillips 66 Partners, while the public owns a 26.3 percent limited partner interest.  We consolidate Phillips 66 Partners as a variable interest entity for financial reporting purposes (see Note 3—Variable Interest Entities (VIEs), in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information).  The public's ownership interest in Phillips 66 Partners is reflected as a noncontrolling interest in our financial statements, including $408 million in the equity section of our consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2013.  Phillips 66 Partners' cash and cash equivalents at September 30, 2013, were $422 million. Credit Facilities Effective June 10, 2013, we amended our revolving credit agreement by entering into the First Amendment to Credit Agreement (Amendment).  The Amendment increased the borrowing capacity from $4.0 billion to $4.5 billion, extended the term from February 2017 to June 2018, reduced the margin applied to interest and fees accruing on and after the Amendment effective date, and made certain amendments with respect to Phillips 66 Partners.  As of September 30, 2013 , no amount had been drawn under this facility; however, $51 million in letters of credit had been issued that were supported by this facility. On June 7, 2013, Phillips 66 Partners entered into a senior unsecured $250 million revolving credit agreement (Revolver) with a syndicate of financial institutions.  On July 26, 2013, Phillips 66 Partners, in connection with its initial public offering of common units, closed on the facility.  Phillips 66 Partners has the option to increase the overall capacity of the Revolver by up to an additional $250 million, subject to certain conditions.  The Revolver has an initial term of five years.  As of September 30, 2013 , no amount had been drawn under this facility. Trade Receivables Securitization Facility Our trade receivables securitization facility, which was entered into during April 2012, has a term of three years.  During the second quarter of 2013, we amended the facility by entering into the First Amendment to Receivables Purchase Agreement (Securitization Amendment).  The Securitization Amendment decreased the borrowing capacity from $1.2 billion to $696 million and made certain amendments with respect to Phillips 66 Partners.  As of September 30, 2013 , no amount had been drawn under this facility.  However, $26 million in letters of credit had been issued that were collateralized by trade receivables held by a subsidiary under this facility. Shelf Registration We have a universal shelf registration statement on file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) under which we, as a well-known seasoned issuer, have the ability to issue and sell an indeterminate amount of various types of debt and equity securities. Other Financing In August 2013, we entered into a 20-year capital lease obligation for use of an oil terminal in the United Kingdom.  The capital lease matures in 2033 and the present value of our minimum capital lease payments as of September 30, 2013, was $177 million. 42 Table of Contents Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In April 2012, in connection with the Separation, we entered into an agreement to guarantee 100 percent of certain outstanding debt obligations of MSLP.  At September 30, 2013 , the aggregate principal amount of MSLP debt guaranteed by us was $224 million . For additional information about guarantees, see Note 12—Guarantees , in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Capital Requirements For information about our capital expenditures and investments, see the “Capital Spending” section. Our debt balance at September 30, 2013 , and December 31, 2012 , was $6.2 billion and $7.0 billion, respectively.  Our debt-to-capital ratio was 22 percent and 25 percent at September 30, 2013 , and December 31, 2012 , respectively, within our target range of 20-to-30 percent.  We have no material scheduled debt maturities in 2013; however, in June 2013, we made a $500 million prepayment on our term loan and, in September 2013, prepaid the remaining balance of $500 million . On July 10, 2013, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.3125 per common share.  The dividend was paid on September 3, 2013, to holders of record at the close of business on August 16, 2013.  On October 2, 2013, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.39 per common share, representing an increase of 25 percent from the prior quarter.  The dividend is payable on December 2, 2013, to holders of record at the close of business on November 14, 2013. During 2012, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $2 billion of our outstanding common stock.  During the third quarter of 2013, we repurchased 11,620,304 shares at a cost of $674 million .  Since our share repurchase program began in the third quarter of 2012, share repurchases totaled 34,248,949 shares at a cost of $1,958 million through September 30, 2013 .  In October 2013, we completed our initial $2 billion share repurchase program.  On July 30, 2013, our Board of Directors authorized $1 billion of additional share repurchases to commence upon the completion of the current program.  The share repurchases are expected to be funded primarily through available cash.  Shares of stock repurchased are held as treasury shares. During the first nine months of 2013, we contributed $136 million to our U.S. qualified and non-qualified pension and other postretirement plans and $36 million to our international plans.  We currently expect to make additional contributions of approximately $20 million in the fourth quarter of 2013, primarily to our international plans. Capital Spending *Our share of capital spending, which is self-funded by the equity affiliate. 43 Table of Contents Midstream During the first nine months of 2013 , DCP Midstream had a self-funded capital program, and thus required no new capital infusions from us or our co-venturer.  During this period, on a 100 percent basis, DCP Midstream's capital expenditures and investments were approximately $ 1,520 million .  During the first nine months of 2013, we invested a total of $195 million in the Sand Hills and Southern Hills pipeline projects, increasing our total direct investment to $709 million . Chemicals During the first nine months of 2013 , CPChem had a self-funded capital program, and thus required no new capital infusions from us or our co-venturer.  During this period, on a 100 percent basis, CPChem's capital expenditures and investments were $ 865 million .  In addition, CPChem's advances to equity affiliates, primarily used for project construction and startup activities, were $69 million and its repayments received from equity affiliates were $55 million.  We are currently forecasting CPChem to remain self-funding through 2013. Refining Capital spending for the Refining segment during the first nine months of 2013 was primarily for air emission reduction projects to meet new environmental standards, refinery upgrade projects to increase accessibility of advantaged crudes and improve product yields, improvements to the operating integrity of key processing units and safety-related projects. Major construction activities in progress include: Generally, our equity affiliates in the Refining segment are intended to have self-funding capital programs. Marketing and Specialties Capital spending for the M&S segment during the first nine months of 2013 was primarily for the acquisition of, and investments in, retail sites in the western and Midwestern portions of the United States, reliability and maintenance projects, and projects targeted at growing our international Marketing and Specialties businesses. Corporate and Other Capital spending for Corporate and Other during the first nine months of 2013 was primarily for facilities- and information technology-related projects. 2014 Outlook We are currently forecasting a 2014 capital spending budget in the range of $2.5 billion to $3.0 billion (excluding capital spending self-funded by our equity affiliates).  We expect to finalize our long range planning in the fourth quarter and will provide a more comprehensive review of our capital plans in our 2013 Form 10-K. Contingencies A number of lawsuits involving a variety of claims that arose in the ordinary course of business have been filed against us or are subject to indemnifications provided by us.  We also may be required to remove or mitigate the effects on the environment of the placement, storage, disposal or release of certain chemical, mineral and petroleum substances at various active and inactive sites.  We regularly assess the need for accounting recognition or disclosure of these contingencies.  In the case of all known contingencies (other than those related to income taxes), we accrue a liability when the loss is probable and the amount is reasonably estimable.  If a range of amounts can be reasonably estimated and no amount within the range is a better estimate than any other amount, then the minimum of the range is accrued.  We do not reduce these liabilities for potential insurance or third-party recoveries.  If applicable, we accrue receivables for probable insurance or other third-party recoveries.  In the case of income-tax-related contingencies, we use a cumulative probability-weighted loss accrual in cases where sustaining a tax position is less than certain. Based on currently available information, we believe it is remote that future costs related to known contingent liability exposures will exceed current accruals by an amount that would have a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements.  As we learn new facts concerning contingencies, we reassess our position both with respect to accrued liabilities and other potential exposures.  Estimates particularly sensitive to future changes include contingent liabilities recorded for environmental remediation, tax and legal matters.  Estimated future environmental remediation costs are subject to change due 44 Table of Contents to such factors as the uncertain magnitude of cleanup costs, the unknown time and extent of such remedial actions that may be required, and the determination of our liability in proportion to that of other responsible parties.  Estimated future costs related to tax and legal matters are subject to change as events evolve and as additional information becomes available during the administrative and litigation processes. Legal and Tax Matters Our legal and tax matters are handled by our legal and tax organizations.  These organizations apply their knowledge, experience and professional judgment to the specific characteristics of our cases and uncertain tax positions.  We employ a litigation management process to manage and monitor the legal proceedings against us.  Our process facilitates the early evaluation and quantification of potential exposures in individual cases and enables the tracking of those cases that have been scheduled for trial and/or mediation.  Based on professional judgment and experience in using these litigation management tools and available information about current developments in all our cases, our legal organization regularly assesses the adequacy of current accruals and determines if adjustment of existing accruals, or establishment of new accruals, is required.  In the case of income-tax-related contingencies, we monitor tax legislation and court decisions, the status of tax audits and the statute of limitations within which a taxing authority can assert a liability. Environmental We are subject to the same numerous international, federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations as other companies in our industry.  For a discussion of the most significant of these environmental laws and regulations, including those with associated remediation obligations, see the “Environmental” section in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations on pages 44, 45 and 46 of the 2012 Annual Report on Form 10-K. From time to time, we receive requests for information or notices of potential liability from the EPA and state environmental agencies alleging that we are a potentially responsible party under the Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) or an equivalent state statute.  On occasion, we also have been made a party to cost recovery litigation by those agencies or by private parties.  These requests, notices and lawsuits assert potential liability for remediation costs at various sites that typically are not owned by us, but allegedly contain wastes attributable to our past operations.  As of December 31, 2012 , we reported that we had been notified of potential liability under CERCLA and comparable state laws at 48 sites around the United States.  During the first nine months of 2013, we were notified of 3 new sites, settled and closed 1 site and determined 13 sites were resolved, leaving 37 unresolved sites with potential liability. At September 30, 2013 , our consolidated balance sheet included a total environmental accrual of $ 505 million , compared with $ 530 million at December 31, 2012 .  We expect to incur a substantial amount of these expenditures within the next 30 years. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, and as with other companies engaged in similar businesses, environmental costs and liabilities are inherent concerns in our operations and products, and there can be no assurance that material costs and liabilities will not be incurred.  However, we currently do not expect any material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial position as a result of compliance with current environmental laws and regulations. Climate Change There has been a broad range of proposed or promulgated state, national and international laws focusing on greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction.  These proposed or promulgated laws apply or could apply in states and/or countries where we have interests or may have interests in the future.  Laws in this field continue to evolve, and while it is not possible to accurately estimate either a timetable for implementation or our future compliance costs relating to implementation, such laws, if enacted, could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial condition.  We previously disclosed that the EPA’s announcement on March 29, 2010 (published as “Interpretation of Regulations that Determine Pollutants Covered by Clean Air Act Permitting Programs,” 75 Fed. Reg. 17004 (April 2, 2010)), and the EPA’s and U.S. Department of Transportation’s joint promulgation of a Final Rule on April 1, 2010, that triggers regulation of GHGs under the Clean Air Act, may lead to more climate-based claims for damages, and may result in longer agency review time for development projects to determine the extent of potential climate change.  Challenges to both the announcement and rulemaking were denied by the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit (see Coalition for Responsible Regulation v. EPA, 684 F. 3d 102 (D.C. Cir. 2012)), but those government actions are subject to additional legal actions.  We continue to monitor other legislative and regulatory actions and legal proceedings globally for potential impacts on our operations. For examples of legislation or precursors for possible regulation that do or could affect our operations, see the “Climate Change” section in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations on pages 46 and 47 of the 2012 Annual Report on Form 10-K. 45 Table of Contents CAUTIONARY STATEMENT FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE “SAFE HARBOR” PROVISIONS OF THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995 This report includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.  You can identify our forward-looking statements by the words “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “budget,” “continue,” “could,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “seek,” “should,” “will,” “would,” “expect,” “objective,” “projection,” “forecast,” “goal,” “guidance,” “outlook,” “effort,” “target” and similar expressions. We based the forward-looking statements on our current expectations, estimates and projections about us and the industries in which we operate in general.  We caution you these statements are not guarantees of future performance as they involve assumptions that, while made in good faith, may prove to be incorrect, and involve risks and uncertainties we cannot predict.  In addition, we based many of these forward-looking statements on assumptions about future events that may prove to be inaccurate.  Accordingly, our actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what we have expressed or forecast in the forward-looking statements.  Any differences could result from a variety of factors, including the following: 46 Table of Contents Item 3.   QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK Information about market risks for the nine months ended September 30, 2013 , does not differ materially from that discussed under Item 7A in our 2012 Annual Report on Form 10-K. Item 4.   CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES We maintain disclosure controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports we file or submit under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Act), is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in SEC rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to management, including our principal executive and principal financial officers, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.  As of September 30, 2013 , with the participation of management, our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer and our Executive Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer carried out an evaluation, pursuant to Rule 13a-15(b) of the Act, of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rule 13a-15(e) of the Act).  Based upon that evaluation, our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer and our Executive Vice President, Finance and Chief Financial Officer concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were operating effectively as of September 30, 2013 . There have been no changes in our internal control over financial reporting, as defined in Rule 13a-15(f) of the Act, in the period covered by this report that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. PART II. OTHER INFORMATION Item 1.   LEGAL PROCEEDINGS The following is a description of reportable legal proceedings, including those involving governmental authorities under federal, state and local laws regulating the discharge of materials into the environment, for this reporting period. There were no material developments with respect to matters previously reported in our 2012 Annual Report on Form 10-K or the Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarterly periods ended March 31, 2013, and June 30, 2013. Information with respect to the one new matter that arose during the third quarter of 2013 is reflected below. While it is not possible to accurately predict the final outcome of these pending proceedings, if any one or more of such proceedings were de cided adversely to Phillips 66, we expect there would be no material effect on our consolidated financial position.  Nevertheless, such proceedings are reported pursuant to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) regulations. Our U.S. refineries are implementing two separate consent decrees, regarding alleged violations of the Federal Clean Air Act, with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), six states and one local air pollution agency.  Some of the requirements and limitations contained in the decrees provide for stipulated penalties for violations.  Stipulated penalties under the decrees are not automatic, but must be requested by one of the agency signatories.  As part of periodic reports under the decrees or other reports required by permits or regulations, we occasionally report matters that could be subject to a request for stipulated penalties.  If a specific request for stipulated penalties meeting the reporting threshold set forth in SEC rules is made pursuant to these decrees based on a given reported exceedance, we will separately report that matter and the amount of the proposed penalty. New Matters Phillips 66 is working to resolve allegations brought by the U.S. Attorney's office that the Company violated the Migratory Bird Treaty Act with respect to bird deaths in a refinery storage area brine pond near our Borger, Texas refinery.  The bird deaths were self-reported by Phillips 66. 47 Table of Contents Item 1A.   RISK FACTORS You should carefully consider the following risk factor, in addition to the risk factors disclosed in Item 1A of our 2012 Annual Report on Form 10-K. One of our subsidiaries acts as the general partner of a publicly traded master limited partnership, Phillips 66 Partners LP, which may involve a greater exposure to legal liability than our historic business operations. One of our subsidiaries acts as the general partner of Phillips 66 Partners LP, a publicly traded master limited partnership.  Our control of the general partner of Phillips 66 Partners may increase the possibility that we could be subject to claims of breach of fiduciary duties, including claims of conflicts of interest, related to Phillips 66 Partners.  Any liability resulting from such claims could have a material adverse effect on our future business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Item 2.   UNREGISTERED SALES OF EQUITY SECURITIES AND USE OF PROCEEDS Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities *Includes repurchase of shares of common stock from company employees in connection with the company's broad-based employee incentive plans, when applicable. **During 2012, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $2 billion of our outstanding common stock.  We began purchases under this authorization, which has no expiration date, in the third quarter of 2012.  In July 2013, the Board of Directors approved the repurchase of an additional $1 billion of our outstanding common stock.  The shares under both authorizations will be repurchased from time to time in the open market at the company’s discretion, subject to market conditions and other factors, and in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements and the Tax Sharing Agreement entered into in connection with the Separation.  We are not obligated to acquire any particular amount of common stock and may commence, suspend or discontinue purchases at any time or from time to time without prior notice.  Shares of stock repurchased are held as treasury shares. 48 Table of Contents Item 6. EXHIBITS 49 Table of Contents SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized. 50