10-Q 1 slb-10q_20190331.htm 10-Q slb-10q_20190331.htm UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q QUARTERLY REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 For the quarterly period ended: March 31, 2019 Commission file No.: 1-4601 SCHLUMBERGER N.V. (SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED) (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) Registrant’s telephone number in the United States, including area code, is:   (713) 513-2000 Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.    Yes ☒ No ☐ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files).    Yes ☒ No ☐ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).    Yes ☐ No ☒ Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the issuer’s classes of common stock, as of the latest practicable date. SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED First Quarter 2019 Form 10-Q Table of Contents 2 PART I. FINANCIAL INFORMATION Item 1. Financial Statements. SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF INCOME (Unaudited) See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 3 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (Unaudited) See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 4 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 5 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS (Unaudited) (1) Includes depreciation of property, plant and equipment and amortization of intangible assets, multiclient seismic data costs and SPM investments. (2) Net of the effect of business acquisitions. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 6 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (Unaudited) SHARES OF COMMON STOCK (Unaudited) See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 7 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Unaudited) 1. Basis of Presentation The accompanying unaudited consolidated financial statements of Schlumberger Limited and its subsidiaries (“Schlumberger”) have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America for interim financial information and with the instructions to Form 10-Q and Article 10 of Regulation S-X. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and footnotes required by generally accepted accounting principles for complete financial statements.  In the opinion of Schlumberger management, all adjustments considered necessary for a fair statement have been included in the accompanying unaudited financial statements.  All intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated in consolidation.  Operating results for the three-month period ended March 31, 2019 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the full year ending December 31, 2019.  The December 31, 2018 balance sheet information has been derived from the Schlumberger 2018 audited financial statements.  For further information, refer to the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in the Schlumberger Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 23, 2019. 2. Earnings Per Share The following is a reconciliation from basic earnings per share of Schlumberger to diluted earnings per share of Schlumberger: The number of outstanding options to purchase shares of Schlumberger common stock that were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share, because to do so would have had an antidilutive effect, was as follows: 3. Inventories A summary of inventories, which are stated at the lower of average cost or net realizable value, is as follows: 8 4 . Fixed Assets A summary of fixed assets follows: Depreciation expense relating to fixed assets was $512 million and $523 million in the first quarter of 2019 and 2018, respectively. 5. Multiclient Seismic Data The change in the carrying amount of multiclient seismic data for the three months ended March 31, 2019 was as follows: 6. Intangible Assets The gross book value, accumulated amortization and net book value of intangible assets were as follows: Amortization expense charged to income was $160 million during the first quarter of 2019 and $165 million during the first quarter of 2018. Based on the net book value of intangible assets at March 31, 2019, amortization charged to income for the subsequent five years is estimated to be: remaining three quarters of 2019—$510 million; 2020—$657 million; 2021—$628 million; 2022—$622 million; 2023—$609 million; and 2024—$563 million. 9 7 . Long-term Debt A summary of Long-term Debt follows: The estimated fair value of Schlumberger’s Long-term Debt, based on quoted market prices at March 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, was $16.7 billion and $14.6 billion, respectively. At March 31, 2019, Schlumberger had separate committed credit facility agreements aggregating $6.5 billion with commercial banks, of which $3.8 billion was available and unused.   These committed facilities support commercial paper programs in the United States and Europe, of which $1.0 billion matures in February 2020,  $1.5 billion matures in November 2020, $2.0 billion matures in February 2023 and $2.0 billion matures in February 2024.  Interest rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit vary by facility. Borrowings under Schlumberger’s commercial paper programs at March 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 were $2.7 billion and $2.4 billion, respectively, all of which were classified in Long-term Debt in the Consolidated Balance Sheet . In April 2019, Schlumberger completed a debt exchange offer, pursuant to which it issued $1.500 billion in principal of 3.90% Senior Notes due 2028 (the “New Notes”) in exchange for $401 million of 3.00% Senior Notes due 2020, $234 million of 3.63% Senior Notes due 2022 and $817 million of 4.00% Senior Notes due 2025.  In connection with the exchange of principal, Schlumberger paid a premium of $48 million, substantially all of which was in the form of New Notes.  This premium will be amortized as additional interest expense over the term of the New Notes. 8. Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities Schlumberger is exposed to market risks related to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates.  To mitigate these risks, Schlumberger utilizes derivative instruments.  Schlumberger does not enter into derivative transactions for speculative purposes. Interest Rate Risk Schlumberger is subject to interest rate risk on its debt and its investment portfolio.  Schlumberger maintains an interest rate risk management strategy that uses a mix of variable and fixed rate debt combined with its investment portfolio, and occasionally interest rate swaps, to mitigate the exposure to changes in interest rates. 10 During 2017, a Canadian - dollar functional currency subsidiary of Schlumberger issued $1. 1 billion of US - dollar denominated debt.  Schlumberger entered into cross-currency swaps for an aggregate notional amount of $1.1 billion in order to hedge changes in the fair value of its $0.5 billion 2.20% Senior Notes due 2020 and its $0.6 billion 2.65% Senior Notes due 2022. These cross-currency swaps effectively convert the US - dollar notes to Canadian - dollar denominated debt with fixed annual interest rates of 1.97% and 2.52%, respectively. These cross-currency swaps are designated as cash flow hedges. The changes in the fair values of the hedges are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss. Amounts recorded in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss are reclassified to earnings in the same periods that the underlying hedged item is recognized in earnings. At March 31, 2019, Schlumberger had fixed rate debt aggregating $13.5 billion and variable rate debt aggregating $3.0 billion, after taking into account the effect of interest rate swaps. Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk As a multinational company, Schlumberger generates revenue in more than 120 countries. Schlumberger’s functional currency is primarily the US dollar.  However, outside the United States, a significant portion of Schlumberger’s expenses is incurred in foreign currencies.  Therefore, when the US dollar weakens (strengthens) in relation to the foreign currencies of the countries in which Schlumberger conducts business, the US dollar-reported expenses will increase (decrease). Schlumberger is exposed to risks on future cash flows to the extent that the local currency is not the functional currency and expenses denominated in local currency are not equal to revenues denominated in local currency.  Schlumberger is also exposed to risks on future cash flows relating to certain of its fixed rate debt denominated in currencies other than the functional currency.  Schlumberger uses foreign currency forward contracts to provide a hedge against a portion of these cash flow risks.  These contracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges, with the changes in the fair value of the hedge recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss. Amounts recorded in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss are reclassified into earnings in the same period or periods that the hedged item is recognized in earnings. At March 31, 2019, Schlumberger recognized a cumulative net $16 million loss in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss relating to revaluation of foreign currency forward contracts designated as cash flow hedges, the majority of which is expected to be reclassified into earnings within the next 12 months. Schlumberger is exposed to changes in the fair value of assets and liabilities that are denominated in currencies other than the functional currency.  While Schlumberger uses foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency options to economically hedge this exposure as it relates to certain currencies, these contracts are not designated as hedges for accounting purposes.  Instead, the fair value of the contracts is recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, and changes in the fair value are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Income as are changes in fair value of the hedged item. At March 31, 2019, contracts were outstanding for the US dollar equivalent of $4.0 billion in various foreign currencies, of which $1.1 billion relates to hedges of debt denominated in currencies other than the functional currency. 11 The effect of derivative instruments designated as fair value and cash flow hedges , and those not designated as hedges , on the Consolidated Statement of Income was as follows: 9. Contingencies Schlumberger is party to various legal proceedings from time to time.  A liability is accrued when a loss is both probable and can be reasonably estimated.  Management believes that the probability of a material loss with respect to any currently pending legal proceeding is remote.  However, litigation is inherently uncertain and it is not possible to predict the ultimate disposition of any of these proceedings. 10. Segment Information (1) Comprised principally of certain corporate expenses not allocated to the segments, stock-based compensation costs, amortization expense associated with certain intangible assets, certain centrally managed initiatives and other nonoperating items. (2) Interest income excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($1 million in 2019; $3 million in 2018). (3) Interest expense excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($11 million in 2019; $12 million in 2018). 12 Revenue by geographic area was as follows: North America and International revenue disaggregated by segment was as follows: Revenue in excess of billings related to contracts where revenue is recognized over time was $0.2 billion at March 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018.  Such amounts are included within Receivables less allowance for doubtful accounts in the Consolidated Balance Sheet . Due to the nature of its business, Schlumberger does not have significant backlog.  Total backlog was $2.9 billion at March 31, 2019, of which approximately 49% is expected to be recognized as revenue over the next 12 months. Billings and cash collections in excess of revenue was $1.0 billion at March 31, 2019 and $0.9 billion at December 31, 2018.  Such amounts are included within Accounts payable and accrued liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet . 13 1 1 . Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans Net pension cost (credit) for the Schlumberger pension plans included the following components: The net periodic benefit credit for the Schlumberger US postretirement medical plan included the following components: 14 Item 2. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. First Quarter 2019 Compared to Fourth Quarter 2018 (1) Comprised principally of certain corporate expenses not allocated to the segments, stock-based compensation costs, amortization expense associated with certain intangible assets, certain centrally managed initiatives and other nonoperating items. (2) Interest income excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($1 million in 2019; $2 million in 2018). (3) Interest expense excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($11 million in 2019; $9 million in 2018). (4) Charges and credits recorded during the fourth quarter of 2018 consisted of a $215 million gain on sale of marine seismic acquisition business, a $184 million charge associated with workforce reductions and a $172 million charge related to the impairment of certain long-lived assets. First-quarter revenue of $7.9 billion declined 4% sequentially, reflecting the expected reduction in North America land activity and seasonally lower international activity in the Northern Hemisphere. In addition, reduced software, product, and multiclient seismic license sales following the fourth-quarter increase and lower Cameron long-cycle project deliveries contributed to the sequential decline. Improved sequential activity in Latin America marginally offset these declines. International business results were strong, with the Reservoir Characterization, Drilling, and Production segments combining to deliver year-on-year international revenue growth of 8%, tracking Schlumberger’s expectation of high single-digit growth in the international markets for these segments for the full-year 2019. In North America, first-quarter revenue was 3% lower sequentially driven by softer pricing and lower activity for both the hydraulic fracturing- and drilling-related businesses, while revenue from the artificial lift product line was flat sequentially. Offshore revenue in North America was slightly down sequentially with increased wireline activity in the US Gulf of Mexico offset by lower multiclient seismic license sales. First-quarter revenue for Reservoir Characterization fell 7% sequentially due to seasonally lower sales of software and multiclient seismic licenses. Drilling revenue declined 3% sequentially due to reduced winter activity in the Northern Hemisphere. Production revenue was 2% lower sequentially, driven by decreased OneStim ® revenue in North America and reduced artificial lift sales in the international markets. Cameron revenue declined 7% sequentially, primarily due to lower project deliveries from the long-cycle businesses of OneSubsea ® and Drilling Systems. Reservoir Characterization pretax operating margin of 19% was 308 basis points (“bps”) lower sequentially due to seasonally lower revenue from Wireline activity in the Russia & Central Asia GeoMarket and decreased overall sales of SIS software and WesternGeco multiclient seismic licenses. 15 Drilling and Production pretax operating margin s of 13% and 8%, respectively, w ere essentially flat sequentially while Cameron pretax operating margin of 12% was 161 bps higher sequentially due to improved profitability in OneSubsea and Drilling Systems, and higher sales volumes and improved pricing in Valves & Measurement. From a macro perspective, Schlumberger expects the oil market sentiments to steadily improve over the course of 2019, supported by a solid demand outlook combined with the OPEC and Russia production cuts taking full effect, slowing shale oil production growth in North America, and a further weakening of the international production base as the impact of four years of underinvestment becomes increasingly evident. Schlumberger also continues to see clear signs that E&P investments are starting to normalize as the industry heads toward a more sustainable financial stewardship of the global resource base. Directionally, this means that higher investments in the international markets are required simply to keep production flat, while North America land is set for lower investments with a likely downward adjustment to the current production growth outlook. Schlumberger’s view of the international markets is consistent with recent third-party spending surveys, suggesting that E&P investments will increase by 7 to 8% in 2019, supported by a higher rig count and a rise in the number of customer project FIDs. In line with this, offshore development activity plans continue to strengthen, with subsea tree awards reaching their highest level since 2013 last year. Schlumberger is also seeing the start of a return to exploration activity on renewed interest in reserves replacement. Notably, new discoveries in 2018 were at the lowest level since 2000. Conversely in North America land, the higher cost of capital, lower borrowing capacity, and investors looking for increased returns suggest that future E&P investment levels will likely be dictated by free cash flow. Schlumberger therefore expects E&P investments in North America land to be down 10% in 2019. In addition, rising technical challenges—from parent-child well interference, step-outs from core acreage, and limited growth in lateral length and proppant per stage—all point to more moderate growth in US shale oil production in the coming years. First Quarter 2019 Compared to First Quarter 2018 (1) Comprised principally of certain corporate expenses not allocated to the segments, stock-based compensation costs, amortization expense associated with certain intangible assets, certain centrally managed initiatives and other nonoperating items. (2) Interest income excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($1 million in 2019; $3 million in 2018). (3) Interest expense excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($11 million in 2019; $12 million in 2018). 16 Reservoir Characterization First-quarter 2019 revenue of $1.5 billion decreased by 1% year-on-year. Revenue for Wireline, Testing Services and Software Integrated Solutions all slightly improved year-on-year, but was more than offset by the impact of the sale of the marine seismic acquisition business during the fourth quarter of 2018 and lower revenue for OneSurface on long-term projects in the Middle East. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin was essentially flat at 19%. Drilling First-quarter 2019 revenue of $2.4 billion increased 12% year-on-year primarily due to strong growth from Integrated Drilling Services projects in several GeoMarkets that also benefited M-I SWACO and Drilling & Measurements. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin declined 90 bps to 13% despite the higher revenue, driven primarily by the new integrated contracts. Production First-quarter 2019 revenue of $2.9 billion decreased 2% year-on-year with most of the revenue decrease attributable to lower OneStim activity in North America land. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin was essentially flat at 8%. Cameron First-quarter 2019 revenue of $1.2 billion decreased 10% versus the same period last year driven primarily by the decline of the long-cycle business of OneSubsea. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin decreased 102 bps to 12% due mainly to the decline in higher-margin OneSubsea activities . Interest and Other Income Interest & other income consisted of the following: Other Research & engineering and General & administrative expenses, as a percentage of Revenue , for the first quarter ended March 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows: The effective tax rate for the first quarter of 2019 declined year-on-year to 15.5% from 17.6%, driven primarily by the geographic mix of earnings. 17 Liquidity and Capital Resources Details of the components of liquidity as well as changes in liquidity follow: Key liquidity events during the first three months of 2019 and 2018 included: The following table summarizes the activity under the share repurchase program: 18 Schlumberger generates revenue in more than 120 countries.   As of March 31, 2019, only four of those countries individually accounted for greater than 5% of Schlumberger’s net receivables balance, of which only the United States accounted for greater than 10% of such receivables. As of March 31, 2019, Schlumberger had $2.2 billion of cash and short-term investments on hand.  Schlumberger had separate committed debt facility agreements aggregating $6.5 billion that support commercial paper programs, of which $3.8 billion was available and unused.  Schlumberger believes these amounts are sufficient to meet future business requirements for at least the next 12 months. Borrowings under the commercial paper programs at March 31, 2019 were $2.7 billion. FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS This first-quarter 2019 Form 10-Q, as well as other statements we make, contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the federal securities laws, which include any statements that are not historical facts, such as our forecasts or expectations regarding business outlook; growth for Schlumberger as a whole and for each of its segments (and for specified products or geographic areas within each segment); oil and natural gas demand and production growth; oil and natural gas prices; improvements in operating procedures and technology, including our transformation program; capital expenditures by Schlumberger and the oil and gas industry; the business strategies of Schlumberger’s customers; our effective tax rate; Schlumberger’s SPM projects, joint ventures and alliances; future global economic conditions; and future results of operations. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, global economic conditions; changes in exploration and production spending by Schlumberger’s customers and changes in the level of oil and natural gas exploration and development; general economic, political and business conditions in key regions of the world; foreign currency risk; pricing pressure; weather and seasonal factors; operational modifications, delays or cancellations; production declines; changes in government regulations and regulatory requirements, including those related to offshore oil and gas exploration, radioactive sources, explosives, chemicals, hydraulic fracturing services and climate-related initiatives; the inability of technology to meet new challenges in exploration; and other risks and uncertainties detailed in this first-quarter 2019 Form 10-Q and our most recent Forms 10-K, 10-Q, and 8-K filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission. If one or more of these or other risks or uncertainties materialize (or the consequences of any such development changes), or should our underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual outcomes may vary materially from those reflected in our forward-looking statements. Schlumberger disclaims any intention or obligation to update publicly or revise such statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk. For quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk affecting Schlumberger, see Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk,” of the Schlumberger Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018. Schlumberger’s exposure to market risk has not changed materially since December 31, 2018. Item 4. Controls and Procedures. Schlumberger has carried out an evaluation under the supervision and with the participation of Schlumberger’s management, including the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) and the Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”), of the effectiveness of Schlumberger’s “disclosure controls and procedures” (as such term is defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”)) as of the end of the period covered by this report. Based on this evaluation, the CEO and the CFO have 19 concluded that, as of the end of the period covered by this report, Schlumberg er’s disclosure controls and procedures were effective to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed in the reports that Schlumberger files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules and forms. Schlumberger’s disclosure controls and procedures include controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports filed or subm itted under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to its management, including the CEO and the CFO, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. There was no change in Schlumberger’s internal control over financial re porting during the quarter to which this report relates that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, Schlumberger’s internal control over financial reporting. PART II. OTHER INFORMATION Item 1. Legal Proceedings. The information with respect to this Item 1 is set forth under Note 9— Contingencies, in the Consolidated Financial Statements . Item 1A. Risk Factors. As of the date of this filing, there have been no material changes from the risk factors disclosed in Part 1, Item 1A, of Schlumberger’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018. Item 2. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities None. Issuer Repurchases of Equity Securities As of March 31, 2019, Schlumberger had repurchased $822 million of Schlumberger common stock under its $10 billion share repurchase program. Schlumberger’s common stock repurchase activity for the three months ended March 31, 2019 was as follows: Item 3. Defaults Upon Senior Securities. None . Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures. Our mining operations are subject to regulation by the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration under the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977. Information concerning mine safety violations or other regulatory matters required by section 1503(a) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and Item 104 of Regulation S-K is included in Exhibit 95 to this report. 20 I tem 5. Other Information. In 2013, Schlumberger completed the wind down of its service operations in Iran. Prior to this, certain non-US subsidiaries provided oilfield services to the National Iranian Oil Company and certain of its affiliates (“NIOC”). Schlumberger’s residual transactions or dealings with the government of Iran during the first quarter of 2019 consisted of payments of taxes and other typical governmental charges. Certain non-US subsidiaries of Schlumberger maintain depository accounts at the Dubai branch of Bank Saderat Iran (“Saderat”), and at Bank Tejarat (“Tejarat”) in Tehran and in Kish for the deposit by NIOC of amounts owed to non-US subsidiaries of Schlumberger for prior services rendered in Iran and for the maintenance of such amounts previously received. One non-US subsidiary also maintained an account at Tejarat for payment of local expenses such as taxes. Schlumberger anticipates that it will discontinue dealings with Saderat and Tejarat following the receipt of all amounts owed to Schlumberger for prior services rendered in Iran. 21 Item 6. Exhibits. 22 SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized and in his capacity as Chief Accounting Officer. 23