10-Q 1 slb-10q_20180930.htm 10-Q slb-10q_20180930.htm UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 FORM 10-Q QUARTERLY REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 For the quarterly period ended: September 30, 2018 Commission file No.: 1-4601 SCHLUMBERGER N.V. (SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED) (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) Registrant’s telephone number in the United States, including area code, is:   (713) 513-2000 Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.    Yes ☒ No ☐ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files).    Yes ☒ No ☐ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).    Yes ☐ No ☒ Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the issuer’s classes of common stock, as of the latest practicable date. SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED Third Quarter 2018 Form 10-Q Table of Contents 2 PART I. FINANCIAL INFORMATION Item 1. Financial Statements. SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF INCOME (Unaudited) See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 3 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME (Unaudited) See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 4 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 5 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS (Unaudited) (1) Includes depreciation of property, plant and equipment and amortization of intangible assets, multiclient seismic data costs and SPM investments. (2) Net of the effect of business acquisitions. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 6 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (Unaudited) SHARES OF COMMON STOCK (Unaudited) See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 7 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (Unaudited) 1. Basis of Presentation The accompanying unaudited consolidated financial statements of Schlumberger Limited and its subsidiaries (“Schlumberger”) have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America for interim financial information and with the instructions to Form 10-Q and Article 10 of Regulation S-X. Accordingly, they do not include all of the information and footnotes required by generally accepted accounting principles for complete financial statements.  In the opinion of Schlumberger management, all adjustments considered necessary for a fair statement have been included in the accompanying unaudited financial statements.  All intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated in consolidation.  Operating results for the nine-month period ended September 30, 2018 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the full year ending December 31, 2018.  The December 31, 2017 balance sheet information has been derived from the Schlumberger 2017 audited financial statements.  For further information, refer to the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in the Schlumberger Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on January 24, 2018. Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncement In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers .  This ASU amended the existing accounting standards for revenue recognition and requires companies to recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to a customer at an amount that reflects the consideration a company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services.  Schlumberger adopted this ASU on January 1, 2018 using the modified retrospective transition method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2018.   Prior period amounts have not been adjusted and continue to be reflected in accordance with Schlumberger’s historical accounting.  The adoption of this ASU did not have a material impact on Schlumberger’s Consolidated Financial Statements . Schlumberger recognizes revenue upon the transfer of control of promised products or services to customers at an amount that reflects the consideration it expects to receive in exchange for these products or services.  The vast majority of Schlumberger’s services and product offerings are short-term in nature.  The time between invoicing and when payment is due under these arrangements is generally 30 to 60 days. Revenue is occasionally generated from contractual arrangements that include multiple performance obligations.  Revenue from these arrangements is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price.  Standalone selling prices are generally determined based on the prices charged to customers or using expected costs plus margin. Revenue is recognized for certain long-term construction-type contracts over time.  These contracts involve significant design and engineering efforts in order to satisfy custom designs for customer-specific applications.  Revenue is recognized as work progresses on each contract.  Progress is measured by the ratio of actual costs incurred to date on the project in relation to total estimated project costs.  The estimate of total project costs has a significant impact on both the amount of revenue recognized as well as the related profit on a project.  Revenue and profits on contracts can also be significantly affected by change orders and claims.  Due to the nature of these projects, adjustments to estimates of contract revenue and total contract costs may be required as work progresses.  Progress billings are generally issued upon completion of certain phases of work as stipulated in the contract.  Any expected losses on a project are recorded in full in the period in which they become probable. Revenue in excess of billings related to contracts where revenue is recognized over time was $0.2 billion at September 30, 2018 and $0.3 billion at December 31, 2017.  Such amounts are included within Receivables less allowance for doubtful accounts in the Consolidated Balance Sheet . Due to the nature of its business, Schlumberger does not have significant backlog.  Total backlog was $2.5 billion at September 30, 2018, of which approximately 59% is expected to be recognized as revenue over the next 12 months. Billings and cash collections in excess of revenue was $0.8 billion at both September 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017.  Such amounts are included within Accounts payable and accrued liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet . Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncement In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases .  This ASU requires lessees to recognize a right of use asset and lease liability on the balance sheet for all leases, with the exception of short-term leases.  This ASU is effective for Schlumberger on 8 January 1, 2019 , with early adoption permitted .  Based on its current lease portfolio, Schlumberger estimates that the adoption of this ASU will result in approximately $ 1.2 billion of additional assets and liabilities being reflected on its Consolidated Balance Sheet . 2. Charges and Credits 2018 There were no charges or credits recorded during the first and third quarters of 2018. During the second quarter of 2018, Schlumberger recorded a $184 million pretax charge ($164 million after-tax) associated with headcount reductions, primarily to further streamline its support cost structure.  This charge is classified in Impairments & other in the Consolidated Statement of Income . 2017 Schlumberger recorded the following charges and credits during the first nine months of 2017: Third quarter of 2017: Second quarter of 2017: During the second quarter of 2017, Schlumberger also entered into discussions with another customer relating to certain of its outstanding accounts receivable.  As a result of those discussions, Schlumberger recorded a charge of $50 million to adjust these receivables to their estimated net realizable value. These charges are classified in Impairments & other in the Consolidated Statement of Income. First quarter of 2017: The following is a summary of the charges and credits recorded during the first nine months of 2017: 9 Although the $76 million net charge represents a reasonable estimate of the impact of the income tax effects of the Act on Schlumberger’s Consolidated Financial Statements as of December 31, 2017, it should be considered provisional. Once Schlumberger finalizes certain tax positions, it will be able to conclude whether any further adjustments are required. Any adjustments to these provisional amounts will be reported as a component of Taxes on income in the reporting period in which any such adjustments are determined, which will be no later than the fourth quarter of 2018. 3. Earnings Per Share The following is a reconciliation from basic earnings per share of Schlumberger to diluted earnings per share of Schlumberger: The number of outstanding options to purchase shares of Schlumberger common stock that were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share, because to do so would have had an antidilutive effect, was as follows: 10 4. Inventories A summary of inventories, which are stated at the lower of average cost or net realizable value, follows: 5. Fixed Assets A summary of fixed assets follows: Depreciation expense relating to fixed assets was as follows: 6. Multiclient Seismic Data The change in the carrying amount of multiclient seismic data for the nine months ended September 30, 2018 was as follows: 11 7 . Intangible Assets The gross book value, accumulated amortization and net book value of intangible assets were as follows: Amortization expense charged to income was as follows: Based on the net book value of intangible assets at September 30, 2018, amortization charged to income for the subsequent five years is estimated to be: fourth quarter of 2018—$169 million; 2019—$680 million; 2020—$648 million; 2021—$617 million; 2022—$609 million; and 2023—$594 million. 8. Long-term Debt A summary of Long-term Debt follows: 12 The estimated fair value of Schlumberger’s Long-term Debt, based on quoted market prices at September 30, 2018 and December 31, 2017, was $14.1 billion and $15.2 billion, respectively. Borrowings under Schlumberger’s commercial paper programs at September 30, 2018 were $3.1 billion, of which $0.5 billion was classified in Short-term borrowings and current portion of long-term debt in the Consolidated Balance Sheet .  At December 31, 2017, borrowings under the commercial paper programs were $3.0 billion, of which $1.3 billion was classified in Short-term borrowings and current portion of long-term debt in the Consolidated Balance Sheet . 9. Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities Schlumberger is exposed to market risks related to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates.  To mitigate these risks, Schlumberger utilizes derivative instruments.  Schlumberger does not enter into derivative transactions for speculative purposes. Interest Rate Risk Schlumberger is subject to interest rate risk on its debt and its investment portfolio.  Schlumberger maintains an interest rate risk management strategy that uses a mix of variable and fixed rate debt combined with its investment portfolio, and occasionally interest rate swaps, to mitigate the exposure to changes in interest rates. During 2013, Schlumberger entered into a cross-currency swap for a notional amount of €0.5 billion in order to hedge changes in the fair value of Schlumberger’s €0.5 billion 1.50% Guaranteed Notes due 2019.  Under the terms of this swap, Schlumberger will receive interest at a fixed rate of 1.50% on the euro notional amount and pay interest at a floating rate of three-month LIBOR plus approximately 64 basis points on the US dollar notional amount. This cross-currency swap is designated as a fair value hedge of the underlying debt and is marked to market, with gains and losses recognized immediately in income to largely offset the effects on changes in the fair value of the hedged debt. During 2017, a Canadian dollar functional currency subsidiary of Schlumberger issued $1.1 billion of US dollar denominated debt.  Schlumberger entered into cross-currency swaps for an aggregate notional amount of $1.1 billion in order to hedge changes in the fair value of its $0.5 billion 2.20% Senior Notes due 2020 and its $0.6 billion 2.65% Senior Notes due 2022. These cross-currency swaps effectively convert the US dollar notes to Canadian dollar denominated debt with fixed annual interest rates of 1.97% and 2.52%, respectively. These cross-currency swaps are designated as cash flow hedges. The changes in the fair values of the hedges are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss. Amounts recorded in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss are reclassified to earnings in the same periods that the underlying hedged item is recognized in earnings. At September 30, 2018, Schlumberger had fixed rate debt aggregating $13.3 billion and variable rate debt aggregating $4.1 billion, after taking into account the effect of interest rate swaps. Short-term investments were $1.4 billion at September 30, 2018.  The carrying value of these investments approximated fair value. Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk As a multinational company, Schlumberger conducts its business in more than 85 countries. Schlumberger’s functional currency is primarily the US dollar.  However, outside the United States, a significant portion of Schlumberger’s expenses is incurred in foreign currencies.  Therefore, when the US dollar weakens (strengthens) in relation to the foreign currencies of the countries in which Schlumberger conducts business, the US dollar-reported expenses will increase (decrease). Schlumberger is exposed to risks on future cash flows to the extent that the local currency is not the functional currency and expenses denominated in local currency are not equal to revenues denominated in local currency.  Schlumberger is also exposed to risks on future cash flows relating to certain of its fixed rate debt denominated in currencies other than the functional currency.  Schlumberger uses foreign currency forward contracts to provide a hedge against a portion of these cash flow risks.  These contracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges, with the changes in the fair value of the hedge recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss. Amounts recorded in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss are reclassified into earnings in the same period or periods that the hedged item is recognized in earnings. 13 At September 30 , 2018, Schlumberger recognized a cumulative net $ 5 million loss in Accumulated O ther C omprehensive L oss relating to revaluation of foreign currency forward contracts designated as cash flow hedges, the majority of which is expected to be reclassified into earnings within the next 12 months. Schlumberger is exposed to changes in the fair value of assets and liabilities that are denominated in currencies other than the functional currency.  While Schlumberger uses foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency options to economically hedge this exposure as it relates to certain currencies, these contracts are not designated as hedges for accounting purposes.  Instead, the fair value of the contracts is recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, and changes in the fair value are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Income as are changes in fair value of the hedged item. At September 30, 2018, contracts were outstanding for the US dollar equivalent of $5.0 billion in various foreign currencies, of which $1.9 billion relates to hedges of debt denominated in currencies other than the functional currency. The effect of derivative instruments designated as fair value and cash flow hedges, and those not designated as hedges, on the Consolidated Statement of Income was as follows: 10. Contingencies Schlumberger is party to various legal proceedings from time to time.  A liability is accrued when a loss is both probable and can be reasonably estimated.  Management believes that the probability of a material loss with respect to any currently pending legal proceeding is remote.  However, litigation is inherently uncertain and it is not possible to predict the ultimate disposition of any of these proceedings. 14 1 1 . Segment Information (1) Comprised principally of certain corporate expenses not allocated to the segments, stock-based compensation costs, amortization expense associated with certain intangible assets, certain centrally managed initiatives and other nonoperating items. (2) Interest income excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($2 million in 2018; $4 million in 2017). (3) Interest expense excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($8 million in 2018; $13 million in 2017). (4) See Note 2 – Charges and Credits . (1) Comprised principally of certain corporate expenses not allocated to the segments, stock-based compensation costs, amortization expense associated with certain intangible assets, certain centrally managed initiatives and other nonoperating items. (2) Interest income excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($7 million in 2018; $15 million in 2017). (3) Interest expense excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($29 million in 2018; $39 million in 2017). (4) See Note 2 – Charges and Credits . 15 Revenue by geographic area was as follows: North America and International revenue disaggregated by segment was as follows: 12. Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans Net pension cost for the Schlumberger pension plans included the following components: 16 The net periodic benefit credit for the Schlumberger US postretirement medical plan included the following components: 13. Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss consists of the following: 17 Item 2. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Third Quarter 2018 Compared to Third Quarter 2017 (1) Comprised principally of certain corporate expenses not allocated to the segments, stock-based compensation costs, amortization expense associated with certain intangible assets, certain centrally managed initiatives and other nonoperating items. (2) Interest income excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($2 million in 2018; $4 million in 2017). (3) Interest expense excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($8 million in 2018; $13 million in 2017). (4) Charges and credits are described in detail in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements . The oil market continued to tighten in the third quarter as seen by a further draw in global oil inventories and a significant increase in oil prices despite continued strong production from the US and increasing output from key OPEC countries. Global spare capacity is now less than 2%. The tightening supply and demand balance is driven by accelerating decline rates in the international production base and is further exacerbated by the ongoing reduction in Venezuelan and Iranian exports. Geopolitical events and their impact on supply are also becoming an increasing oil market consideration as the challenging security situation in several key countries could affect activity and production going forward. And while the current Permian takeaway constraints in North America should be addressed within the next 12 to 18 months, a series of reservoir- and production-related challenges is emerging in the US shale basins that could dampen the most optimistic production growth projections. With the outlook for global economic growth and oil demand remaining solid, Schlumberger continues to see a need for a multiyear increase in international E&P investment.  Through the work Schlumberger has done over the past four years to expand its external offering and modernize its internal execution platform, it is well-positioned to outgrow the market in the expected upcycle. Third-quarter 2018 revenue of $8.5 billion increased 8% year-on-year. The global rig count increased 4% as compared to the same period last year, North America land rig count increased by 10% and international rig count was essentially flat. North America revenue increased 23% largely driven by the deployment of additional hydraulic fracturing equipment and market share gains as compared to the prior year.  International revenue improved by 1%. Reservoir Characterization Third-quarter 2018 revenue of $1.7 billion decreased 6% year-on-year primarily due to reduced OneSurface revenue in the Middle East following the end of the first phase of an integrated production system project and reduced WesternGeco activity as marine seismic acquisition contracts continue to wind down. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin increased 470 basis points (“bps”) to 22% primarily as a result of reduced depreciation and amortization following the WesternGeco impairment charges in the fourth quarter of 2017. 18 Drilling Third-quarter 2018 revenue of $2.4 billion increased 15% year-on-year primarily due to higher demand for directional drilling technologies on land in North America and the start of new integrated drilling projects internationally. This benefited all the product lines, led by M-I SWACO, Integrated Drilling Services, and Drilling & Measurements. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin declined slightly by 22 bps to 14% due primarily to mobilization and project start-up costs associated with the new integrated drilling projects. Production Third-quarter 2018 revenue of $3.3 billion increased 13% year-on-year with the majority of the revenue growth driven by accelerated land activity growth in North America that benefited the OneStim pressure pumping businesses. Growth was driven primarily by the deployment of hydraulic fracturing capacity and market share gains as compared to the prior year.  However, service revenue from the OneStim hydraulic fracturing business was increasingly impacted by softening activity and pricing over the course of the third quarter of 2018.  The dynamics of the pressure pumping market changed during the quarter and activity will likely continue to decline until the Permian takeaway capacity constraints are resolved. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin remained flat at 10%. Cameron Third-quarter 2018 revenue of $1.3 billion was flat year-on-year as higher revenue on land in North America benefiting the short-cycle businesses of Surface Systems and Valves & Measurement was offset by the decline of the long-cycle businesses of OneSubsea. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin decreased 349 bps to 11%, driven primarily by the decline in high-margin OneSubsea project volumes. Nine Months 2018 Compared to Nine Months 2017 (1) Comprised principally of certain corporate expenses not allocated to the segments, stock-based compensation costs, amortization expense associated with certain intangible assets, certain centrally managed initiatives and other nonoperating items. (2) Interest income excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($7 million in 2018; $15 million in 2017). 19 (3) Interest expense excludes amounts which are included in the segments’ income ($ 29 million in 2018; $ 39 million in 2017). (4) Charges and credits are described in detail in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements . Nine-month 2018 revenue of $24.6 billion increased 11% year-on-year. The global rig count increased 6% as the North American land rig count increased 11% and the international rig count was flat versus the same period last year. Revenue in North America grew 37% driven by the deployment of additional hydraulic fracturing capacity, market share gains, operational efficiency improvements and improved pricing. International revenue was essentially flat. Reservoir Characterization Nine-month 2018 revenue of $4.9 billion decreased 5% year-on-year primarily due to reduced OneSurface revenue following the end of the first phase of an integrated production system project in the Middle East and reduced WesternGeco activity as marine seismic acquisition contracts continue to wind down. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin increased 386 bps to 21% primarily as a result of reduced depreciation and amortization following the WesternGeco impairment charges recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017. Drilling Nine-month 2018 revenue of $6.8 billion increased 9% year-on-year primarily due to higher demand for directional drilling technologies on land in North America and the start of new integrated drilling projects internationally. This benefited Drilling & Measurements, Bits & Drilling tools, M-I SWACO and Integrated Drilling Services. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin was essentially flat at 14%. Production Nine-month 2018 revenue of $9.5 billion increased 25% year-on-year with most of the revenue increase attributable to the accelerated land activity growth in North America that benefited the OneStim pressure pumping businesses in North America land. Growth was driven by the deployment of additional hydraulic fracturing capacity, market share gains, operational efficiency improvements, and improved pricing. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin increased 87 bps to 9% as a result of improved profitability in North America due to accelerated land activity and improved pricing. Cameron Nine-month 2018 revenue of $3.9 billion increased 3% year-on-year due to higher revenue in North America land benefiting the short-cycle businesses of Surface Systems and Valves & Measurement.  This was largely offset by the decline of the long-cycle businesses of Drilling Systems and OneSubsea. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin of 12% declined 166 bps due primarily to the decline in high-margin OneSubsea project volumes. Interest and Other Income Interest & other income consisted of the following: 20 Other Research & engineering and General & administrative expenses, as a percentage of Revenue , for the third quarter and nine months ended September 30, 2018 and 2017 were as follows: Research & engineering and General & administrative costs for the third quarter of 2018 and the first nine months of 2018 have decreased as a percentage of revenue compared to the same periods in 2017 as a result of cost control measures. The effective tax rate for the third quarter of 2018 declined year-on-year to 16.4% from 17.9%, driven primarily by the decrease in the US statutory tax rate as a result of tax reform. The effective tax rate for the first nine months of 2018 was 17.6% and 26.2% for the same period in 2017. The charges described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements increased the effective tax rate for the first nine months of 2018 by 60 bps and eight percentage points for the same period of 2017, as the majority of these charges were not tax-effective.  Excluding these charges, the effective tax rate for the first nine months of 2018 was 17.0% as compared to 17.8% for the same period of 2017. Charges and Credits 2018 There were no charges or credits recorded during the first and third quarters of 2018. During the second quarter of 2018, Schlumberger recorded a $184 million pretax charge ($164 million after-tax) associated with headcount reductions, primarily to further streamline its support cost structure.  This charge is classified in Impairments & other in the Consolidated Statement of Income . 2017 Schlumberger recorded charges during the first, second and third quarters of 2017, which are fully described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements .  The following is a summary of the charges recorded during the first nine months of 2017: Liquidity and Capital Resources Details of the components of liquidity as well as changes in liquidity follow: 21 Key liquidity events during the nine months of 2018 and 2017 included: The following table summarizes the activity under these share repurchase programs: 22 Schlumberger operates in more than 85 countries.   As of September 30, 2018, only three of those countries individually accounted for greater than 5% of Schlumberger’s net receivables balance, of which only the United States accounted for greater than 10% of such receivables. As of September 30, 2018, Schlumberger had $2.9 billion of cash and short-term investments on hand.  Schlumberger had separate committed debt facility agreements aggregating $6.5 billion that support commercial paper programs, of which $3.4 billion was available and unused.  Schlumberger believes these amounts are sufficient to meet future business requirements for at least the next 12 months. Borrowings under the commercial paper programs at September 30, 2018 were $3.1 billion. FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS This third-quarter 2018 Form 10-Q, as well as other statements we make, contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the federal securities laws, which include any statements that are not historical facts, such as our forecasts or expectations regarding business outlook; growth for Schlumberger as a whole and for each of its segments (and for specified products or geographic areas within each segment); oil and natural gas demand and production growth; oil and natural gas prices; improvements in operating procedures and technology, including our transformation program; capital expenditures by Schlumberger and the oil and gas industry; the business strategies of Schlumberger’s customers; the effects of US tax reform; our effective tax rate; Schlumberger’s SPM projects, joint ventures and alliances; future global economic conditions; and future results of operations. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, global economic conditions; changes in exploration and production spending by Schlumberger’s customers and changes in the level of oil and natural gas exploration and development; general economic, political and business conditions in key regions of the world; foreign currency risk; pricing pressure; weather and seasonal factors; operational modifications, delays or cancellations; production declines; changes in government regulations and regulatory requirements, including those related to offshore oil and gas exploration, radioactive sources, explosives, chemicals, hydraulic fracturing services and climate-related initiatives; the inability of technology to meet new challenges in exploration; and other risks and uncertainties detailed in this third-quarter 2018 Form 10-Q and our most recent Forms 10-K, 10-Q, and 8-K filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission. If one or more of these or other risks or uncertainties materialize (or the consequences of any such development changes), or should our underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual outcomes may vary materially from those reflected in our forward-looking statements. Schlumberger disclaims any intention or obligation to update publicly or revise such statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk. For quantitative and qualitative disclosures about market risk affecting Schlumberger, see Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk,” of the Schlumberger Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017. Schlumberger’s exposure to market risk has not changed materially since December 31, 2017. Item 4. Controls and Procedures. Schlumberger has carried out an evaluation under the supervision and with the participation of Schlumberger’s management, including the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) and the Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”), of the effectiveness of Schlumberger’s “disclosure controls and procedures” (as such term is defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”)) as of the end of the period covered by this report. Based on this evaluation, the CEO and the CFO have concluded that, as of the end of the period covered by this report, Schlumberger’s disclosure controls and procedures were effective to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed in the reports that Schlumberger files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules and forms. Schlumberger’s disclosure controls and procedures include controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports filed or submitted under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to its management, including the CEO and the CFO, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. There was no change in Schlumberger’s internal control over financial reporting during the quarter to which this report relates that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, Schlumberger’s internal control over financial reporting. 23 PART II. OTHER INFORMATION Item 1. Legal Proceedings. The information with respect to this Item 1 is set forth under Note 10— Contingencies, in the Consolidated Financial Statements . Item 1A. Risk Factors. As of the date of this filing, there have been no material changes from the risk factors disclosed in Part 1, Item 1A, of Schlumberger’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017. Item 2. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities None. Issuer Repurchases of Equity Securities As of September 30, 2018, Schlumberger had repurchased $623 million of Schlumberger common stock under its $10 billion share repurchase program. Schlumberger’s common stock repurchase activity for the three months ended September 30, 2018 was as follows: Item 3. Defaults Upon Senior Securities. None . Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures. Our mining operations are subject to regulation by the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration under the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977. Information concerning mine safety violations or other regulatory matters required by section 1503(a) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and Item 104 of Regulation S-K is included in Exhibit 95 to this report. Item 5. Other Information. In 2013, Schlumberger completed the wind-down of its service operations in Iran. Prior to this, certain non-US subsidiaries provided oilfield services to the National Iranian Oil Company and certain of its affiliates (“NIOC”). Schlumberger’s residual transactions or dealings with the government of Iran during the third quarter of 2018 consisted of payments of taxes and other typical governmental charges. Certain non-US subsidiaries of Schlumberger maintain depository accounts at the Dubai branch of Bank Saderat Iran (“Saderat”), and at Bank Tejarat (“Tejarat”) in Tehran and in Kish for the deposit by NIOC of amounts owed to non-US subsidiaries of Schlumberger for prior services rendered in Iran and for the maintenance of such amounts 24 previously received. One non-US subsidiary also maintains an account at Tejarat for payment of local expense s such as taxes. Schlumberger anticipates that it will discontinue dealings with Saderat and Tejarat following the receipt of all amounts owed to Schlumberger for prior services rendered in Iran. 25 Item 6. Exhibits. 26 SIGNATURE Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned thereunto duly authorized and in his capacity as Chief Accounting Officer. 27