10-K 1 slb-10k_20151231.htm 10-K slb-10k_20151231.htm UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Washington, D.C. 20549 Form 10-K (Mark One) For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015 OR For the transition period from __________ to __________ Commission File Number 1-4601 Schlumberger N.V. (Schlumberger Limited) (Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter) Registrant’s telephone number in the United States, including area code, is: (713) 513-2000 Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act: Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. YES þ NO ¨ Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. YES ¨ NO þ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. YES þ NO ¨ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit and post such files.) YES þ NO ¨ Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of the registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this Form 10-K. ¨ Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer”, “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act. Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act). YES ¨ NO þ As of June 30, 2015, the aggregate market value of the common stock of the registrant held by non-affiliates of the registrant was approximately $109.0 billion. As of December 31, 2015, the number of shares of common stock outstanding was 1,256,367,980. DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE Certain information required to be furnished pursuant to Part III of this Form 10-K is set forth in, and is hereby incorporated by reference herein from, Schlumberger’s definitive proxy statement for its 2016 Annual General Meeting of Stockholders, to be filed by Schlumberger with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to Regulation 14A within 120 days after December 31, 2015 (the “2016 Proxy Statement”). SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED Table of Contents Form 10-K 2 PART I Item 1.  Business. All references in this report to “Registrant,” “Company,” “Schlumberger,” “we” or “our” are to Schlumberger Limited (Schlumberger N.V., incorporated in Curaçao) and its consolidated subsidiaries. Founded in 1926, Schlumberger is the world’s leading supplier of technology, integrated project management and information solutions to the international oil and gas exploration and production industry. Having invented wireline logging as a technique for obtaining downhole data in oil and gas wells, Schlumberger today provides the industry’s widest range of products and services from exploration through production. As of December 31, 2015, the Company employed approximately 95,000 people of over 140 nationalities operating in approximately 85 countries. Schlumberger has principal executive offices in Paris, Houston, London and The Hague. On August 26, 2015, Schlumberger and Cameron International Corporations (Cameron) jointly announced that they had entered into a definitive merger agreement in which Cameron will merge with an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of Schlumberger in a stock and cash transaction. Under the terms of the agreement, Cameron shareholders will receive 0.716 shares of Schlumberger common stock and a cash payment of $14.44 in exchange for each Cameron share of common stock outstanding. Schlumberger estimates that it will issue approximately 137 million shares of its common stock and pay cash of approximately $2.8 billion in connection with this transaction. In November 2015, the US Department of Justice cleared the proposed merger without any conditions.  On December 17, 2015, Cameron stockholders voted to adopt the proposed merger.  However, the transaction remains subject to certain regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions. It is anticipated that the closing of the transaction will occur in the first quarter of 2016. Cameron designs, manufactures, markets and services equipment used by the oil and gas industry and industrial manufacturing companies. Cameron is a leading international manufacturer of oil and gas pressure control and separation equipment, including valves, wellheads, controls, chokes, blowout preventers and assembled systems for oil and gas drilling, production and transmission used in onshore, offshore and subsea applications and provides oil and gas separation, metering and flow measurement equipment. Cameron reported revenue of $10.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2014. Schlumberger operates in each of the major oilfield service markets, managing its business through three Groups: Reservoir Characterization, Drilling and Production.  Each Group consists of a number of technology-based service and product lines, or Technologies.  These Technologies cover the entire life cycle of the reservoir and correspond to a number of markets in which Schlumberger holds leading positions.  The business is also reported through four geographic Areas: North America, Latin America, Europe/CIS/Africa and Middle East & Asia. Within these Areas, a network of GeoMarket* regions provides logistical, technical and commercial coordination. The role of the Groups and Technologies is to support Schlumberger in providing the best possible service to customers and that it remains at the forefront of technology development.  The Groups and Technologies are collectively responsible for driving excellence in execution throughout their businesses, overseeing operational processes, resource allocation, personnel and delivering superior financial results. The GeoMarket structure offers customers a single point of contact at the local level for field operations and brings together geographically focused teams to meet local needs and deliver customized solutions. The Areas and GeoMarkets are responsible for providing the most efficient and cost effective support possible to the operations. The Groups are as follows: Reservoir Characterization Group – Consists of the principal Technologies involved in finding and defining hydrocarbon resources.  These include WesternGeco, Wireline, Testing Services, Software Integrated Solutions (SIS) and Integrated Services Management (ISM). 3 Drilling Group – Consists of the principal Technologies involved in the drilling and positioning of oil and gas wells and comprises Bits & Drilling Tools, M-I SWACO, Drilling & Measurements, Land Rigs and Integrated Drilling Services. Production Group – Consists of the principal Technologies involved in the lifetime production of oil and gas reservoirs and includes Well Services, Completions, Artificial Lift, Well Intervention, Water Services, Integrated Production Services and Schlumberger Production Management. SPM commercial arrangements create alignment between Schlumberger and the asset holder and/or the operator whereby Schlumberger receives remuneration in line with its value creation.  These projects are generally focused on developing and co-managing production of Schlumberger’s customers’ assets under long-term agreements.  Schlumberger will invest its own services and products, and in some cases cash, into the field development activities and operations.  Although in certain arrangements Schlumberger is paid for a portion of the services or products it provides, generally Schlumberger will not be paid at the time of providing its services or upon delivery of its products.  Instead, Schlumberger is generally compensated based upon cash flow generated or on a fee-per-barrel basis.  This may include certain arrangements whereby Schlumberger is only compensated based upon incremental production that it helps deliver above a mutually agreed baseline. Schlumberger also has a 40% equity ownership interest in OneSubsea TM , a joint venture with Cameron.  The joint venture manufactures and develops products, systems and services for the subsea oil and gas market.  Schlumberger’s 40% share of the net income of the joint venture is reflected in the results of the Production Group. 4 Supporting the Technologies is a global network of research and engineering centers. Through this organization, Schlumberger is committed to advanced technology programs that enhance oilfield efficiency, lower finding and producing costs, improv e productivity, maximize reserve recovery and increase asset value while accomplishing these goals in a safe and environmentally sound manner. Schlumberger primarily uses its own personnel to market its offerings. The customer base, business risks and opportunities for growth are essentially uniform across all services. There is a sharing of manufacturing and engineering facilities as well as research centers, and the labor force is interchangeable. Technological innovation, quality of service and price differentiation are the principal methods of competition, which vary geographically with respect to the different services offered. While there are numerous competitors, both large and small, Schlumberger believes that it is an industry leader in providing geophysical services, wireline logging, well testing, exploration and production software, drilling and completion fluids, solids and waste management, coiled-tubing, drill bits, measurement-while-drilling, logging-while-drilling, directional drilling services and mud logging. A large proportion of Schlumberger offerings is non-rig related; consequently, revenue does not necessarily correlate to the rig count. GENERAL Intellectual Property Schlumberger owns and controls a variety of intellectual property, including but not limited to patents, proprietary information and software tools and applications that, in the aggregate, are material to Schlumberger’s business. While Schlumberger seeks and holds numerous patents covering various products and processes, no particular patent or group of patents is considered material to Schlumberger’s business. Seasonality Seasonal changes in weather and significant weather events can temporarily affect the delivery of oilfield services. For example, the spring thaw in Canada and consequent road restrictions can affect activity levels, while the winter months in the North Sea, Russia and China can produce severe weather conditions that typically result in temporarily reduced levels of activity. In addition, hurricanes and typhoons can disrupt coastal and offshore operations. Furthermore, customer spending patterns for multiclient data, software and other oilfield services and products generally result in higher activity in the fourth quarter of each year as clients seek to utilize their annual budgets. Customers and Backlog of Orders For the year ended December 31, 2015, no single customer exceeded 10% of consolidated revenue. Other than WesternGeco, Schlumberger has no significant backlog due to the nature of its businesses. The WesternGeco backlog, which is based on signed contracts with customers, was $1.1 billion at December 31, 2015 ($0.7 billion at December 31, 2014). Financial Information Financial information by business segment and geographic area for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 is provided in Note 17 of the Consolidated Financial Statements . Executive Officers of Schlumberger The following table sets forth, as of January 27, 2016 , the names and ages of the executive officers of Schlumberger, including all offices and positions held by each for at least the past five years. 5 Available Information The Schlumberger Internet website is www.slb.com . Schlumberger uses its Investor Relations website, www.slb.com/ir , as a routine channel for distribution of important information, including news releases, analyst presentations, and financial information. Schlumberger makes available free of charge on or through its Investor Relations website at www.slb.com/ir access to its Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, its Proxy Statements and Forms 3, 4 and 5 filed on behalf of directors and executive officers, and amendments to each of those reports, as soon as reasonably practicable after such material is filed with or furnished to the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). Alternatively, you may access these reports at the SEC’s Internet website at www.sec.gov . Copies are also available, without charge, from Schlumberger Investor Relations, 5599 San Felipe, 17 th Floor, Houston, Texas 77056.  Unless expressly noted, the information on our website or any other website is not incorporated by reference in this Form 10-K and should not be considered part of this Form 10-K or any other filing Schlumberger makes with the SEC. 6 Item 1A. Risk Factors. The following discussion of risk factors known to us contains important information for the understanding of our “forward-looking statements,” which are discussed immediately following Item 7A. of this Form 10-K and elsewhere. These risk factors should also be read in conjunction with Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, and the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included in this Form 10-K. We urge you to consider carefully the risks described below, as well as in other reports and materials that we file with the SEC and the other information included or incorporated by reference in this Form 10-K. If any of the risks described below or elsewhere in this Form 10-K were to materialize, our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or prospects could be materially adversely affected. In such case, the trading price of our common stock could decline and you could lose part or all of your investment. Additional risks and uncertainties not currently known to us or that we currently deem immaterial may also materially adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Demand for the majority of our services is substantially dependent on the levels of expenditures by the oil and gas industry.  The current significant oil and gas industry downturn has resulted in reduced demand for oilfield services, which has had, and may continue to have, a significant adverse impact on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. If these conditions worsen or oil and gas prices do not improve, further reductions in spending by the oil and gas industry could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Demand for the majority of our services depends substantially on the level of expenditures by the oil and gas industry for the exploration, development and production of oil and natural gas reserves. These expenditures are generally dependent on the industry’s view of future oil and natural gas prices and are sensitive to the industry’s view of future economic growth and the resulting impact on demand for oil and natural gas.  Since 2014, oil and gas prices have declined significantly, resulting in lower expenditures by the oil and gas industry.  As a result, many of our customers have reduced or delayed their oil and gas exploration and production spending, reducing the demand for our services and exerting downward pressure on the prices that we charge.  These conditions have had, and may continue to have, an adverse impact on our financial condition. Continued low oil and gas prices or a further decline in oil and gas prices could cause a reduction in cash flows for our customers, which could have significant adverse effects on the financial condition of some of our customers. This could result in project modifications, delays or cancellations, general business disruptions, and delays in payment of, or nonpayment of, amounts that are owed to us. These effects could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. The prices for oil and natural gas have historically been volatile and can be affected by a variety of factors, including: There can be no assurance that the demand or pricing for oil and natural gas will follow historic patterns or recover in the near term.  Continued or worsening conditions in the oil and gas industry could further adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. 7 A significant portion of our revenue is derived from our non-United States operations, which exposes us to risks inherent in doing business in each of the approximately 85 countries in which we operate. Our non-United States operations accounted for approximately 76% of our consolidated revenue in 2015, 71% in 2014 and 73% in 2013. Operations in countries other than the United States are subject to various risks, including: We completed the wind down of our service operations in Iran during the second quarter of 2013. Prior to this, certain of our non-US subsidiaries provided oilfield services to the National Iranian Oil Company and certain of its affiliates (“NIOC”). We have reclassified the results of this business as a discontinued operation. All prior periods have been restated accordingly. Our residual transactions or dealings with the government of Iran during 2015 consisted of payments of taxes and other typical governmental charges. Certain of our non-US subsidiaries maintained depository accounts at the Dubai branch of Bank Saderat Iran (“Saderat”), and at Bank Tejarat (“Tejarat”) in Tehran and in Kish for the deposit by NIOC of amounts owed to non-US subsidiaries of Schlumberger for prior services rendered in Iran and for the maintenance of such amounts previously received. One non-US subsidiary also maintains an account at Tejarat for payment of local expenses such as taxes and utilities. We anticipate that we will discontinue our dealings with Saderat and Tejarat following the receipt of all amounts owed to us for prior services rendered in Iran. Our failure to comply with Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (“FCPA”) and other laws could have a negative impact on our ongoing operations. We are subject to complex US and foreign laws and regulations, such as the FCPA, the U.K. Bribery Act and various other anti-bribery and anti-corruption laws.  We are also subject to trade sanction laws that restrict certain operations in various countries or with certain persons.  The internal controls, policies and procedures, and employee training and compliance programs we have implemented to deter prohibited practices may not be effective in preventing employees, contractors or agents from violating or circumventing such internal policies and violating applicable laws and regulations.  Any determination that we have violated or are responsible for violations of anti-bribery or anti-corruption laws could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition.  Violations of international and US laws and regulations may result in fines and penalties, criminal sanctions, administrative remedies, restrictions on business conduct and could have a material adverse effect on our reputation and our business, operating results and financial condition. Environmental compliance costs and liabilities could reduce our earnings and cash available for operations. We are subject to increasingly stringent laws and regulations relating to importation and use of hazardous materials, radioactive materials, chemicals and explosives and to environmental protection, including laws and regulations governing air emissions, hydraulic fracturing, water discharges and waste management. We incur, and expect to continue to incur, capital and operating costs to comply with environmental laws and regulations. The technical requirements of these laws and regulations are becoming increasingly complex, stringent and expensive to implement. These laws may provide for “strict liability” for remediation costs, damages to natural resources or threats to public health and safety. Strict liability can render a party liable for damages without regard to negligence or fault on the part of the party. Some environmental laws provide for joint and several strict liability for remediation of spills and releases of hazardous substances. We use and generate hazardous substances and wastes in our operations. In addition, many of our current and former properties are, or have been, used for industrial purposes. Accordingly, we could become subject to material liabilities relating to the investigation and cleanup of potentially contaminated properties, and to claims alleging personal injury or property damage as the result of exposures to, or releases of, hazardous substances. In addition, stricter enforcement of existing laws and regulations, new laws and regulations, the 8 discovery of previously unknown contamination or the imposition of new or increased requirements could require us to incur costs or become the basis of new or increased liabilities that could reduce our earnings and our cash available for operations. We could be subject to substantial liability claims, which could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. The technical complexities of our operations expose us to a wide range of significant health, safety and environmental risks. Our offerings involve production-related activities, radioactive materials, chemicals, explosives and other equipment and services that are deployed in challenging exploration, development and production environments. An accident involving these services or equipment, or a failure of a product, could cause personal injury, loss of life, damage to or destruction of property, equipment or the environment, or suspension of operations. Our insurance may not protect us against liability for some kinds of events, including events involving pollution, or against losses resulting from business interruption. Moreover, we may not be able to maintain insurance at levels of risk coverage or policy limits that we deem adequate. Any damages caused by our services or products that are not covered by insurance, or are in excess of policy limits or are subject to substantial deductibles, could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Demand for our products and services could be reduced by existing and future legislation or regulations. Environmental advocacy groups and regulatory agencies in the United States and other countries have been focusing considerable attention on the emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and other greenhouse gasses and their potential role in climate change.  Existing or future legislation and regulations related to greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, as well as government initiatives to conserve energy or promote the use of alternative energy sources, may significantly curtail demand for and production of fossil fuels such as oil and gas in areas of the world where our customers operate and thus adversely affect future demand for our services. This may, in turn, adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Some international, national, state and local governments and agencies have also adopted laws and regulations or are evaluating proposed legislation and regulations that are focused on the extraction of shale gas or oil using hydraulic fracturing. Hydraulic fracturing is a stimulation treatment routinely performed on oil and gas wells in low-permeability reservoirs. Specially engineered fluids are pumped at high pressure and rate into the reservoir interval to be treated, causing cracks in the target formation. Proppant, such as sand of a particular size, is mixed with the treatment fluid to keep the cracks open when the treatment is complete. Future hydraulic fracturing-related legislation or regulations could limit or ban hydraulic fracturing, or lead to operational delays and increased costs, and therefore reduce demand for our pressure pumping services. If such additional international, national, state or local legislation or regulations are enacted, it could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. If we are unable to maintain technology leadership, this could adversely affect any competitive advantage we hold. The oilfield service industry is highly competitive.  Our ability to continually provide competitive technology and services can impact our ability to defend, maintain or increase prices for our services, maintain market share, and negotiate acceptable contract terms with our customers.  If we are unable to continue to develop and produce competitive technology or deliver it to our clients in a timely and cost-competitive manner in the various markets we serve, it could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Limitations on our ability to protect our intellectual property rights, including our trade secrets, could cause a loss in revenue and any competitive advantage we hold. Some of our products or services, and the processes we use to produce or provide them, have been granted patent protection, have patent applications pending or are trade secrets. Our business may be adversely affected if our patents are unenforceable, the claims allowed under our patents are not sufficient to protect our technology, our patent applications are denied, or our trade secrets are not adequately protected. Our competitors may be able to develop technology independently that is similar to ours without infringing on our patents or gaining access to our trade secrets, which could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. We may be subject to litigation if another party claims that we have infringed upon its intellectual property rights. The tools, techniques, methodologies, programs and components we use to provide our services may infringe upon the intellectual property rights of others. Infringement claims generally result in significant legal and other costs and may distract management from running our core business. Royalty payments under licenses from third parties, if available, would increase our costs. Additionally, developing non-infringing technologies would increase our costs. If a license were not available, we might not be able to continue providing a particular service or product, which could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. 9 Failure to obtain and retain skilled technical personnel could impede our operations. We require highly skilled personnel to operate and provide technical services and support for our business. Competition for the personnel required for our businesses intensifies as activity increases. In periods of high utilization it may become more difficult to find and retain qualified individuals. This could increase our costs or have other adverse effects on our operations. Severe weather conditions may affect our operations. Our business may be materially affected by severe weather conditions in areas where we operate. This may entail the evacuation of personnel and stoppage of services. In addition, if particularly severe weather affects platforms or structures, this may result in a suspension of activities. Any of these events could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Cybersecurity risks and threats could affect our business. We rely heavily on information systems to conduct our business.  There can be no assurance that the systems we have designed to prevent or limit the effects of cyber incidents or attacks will be sufficient to prevent or detect such incidents or attacks, or to avoid a material impact on our systems when such incidents or attacks do occur.  If our systems for protecting against cybersecurity risks are circumvented or breached, this could result in the loss of our intellectual property or other proprietary information, including customer data, and disruption of our business operations. Our ability to complete the proposed merger with Cameron is subject to various closing conditions and the receipt of consents and approvals from government entities which may impose conditions that could materially adversely affect Cameron or Schlumberger or cause the merger to be abandoned. The merger agreement contains certain closing conditions, including approval of the proposed merger by Cameron stockholders, the absence of injunctions or other legal restrictions and that no material adverse effect shall have occurred with respect to either company. On December 17, 2015, Cameron stockholders voted to adopt our proposed merger.  Also, in November 2015 the U.S. Department of Justice cleared our proposed merger without any conditions.  However, we will be unable to complete the merger until consents and approvals are received from the European Commission and various other governmental entities.  Regulatory entities have broad discretion in administering the governing regulations and may impose certain requirements or obligations as conditions for their approval. The merger agreement may require us to accept conditions from these regulators that could adversely affect the combined company. If the regulatory clearances are not received, or they are not received on terms that satisfy the conditions set forth in the merger agreement, then we will not be obligated to complete the merger. We can provide no assurance that the various closing conditions will be satisfied and that the necessary approvals will be obtained, or that any required conditions will not materially adversely affect the combined company following the merger. In addition, we can provide no assurance that these conditions will not result in the abandonment or delay of the merger. Failure to complete the proposed merger with Cameron could negatively impact our stock price and our future business and financial results. If the proposed merger is not completed, our ongoing business may be adversely affected and we would be subject to several risks, including a decline in the market price of our common stock, negative customer perception and diversion of management’s focus on pursuing other opportunities that could be beneficial to us, in each case, without realizing any of the benefits that might have resulted had the merger been completed. Multiple lawsuits have been filed against us and Cameron challenging the proposed merger, and an adverse ruling in any such lawsuit may prevent the merger from being completed. After the announcement of the proposed merger, four putative class action lawsuits were commenced on behalf of stockholders of Cameron against Cameron and its directors, as well as against us and Schlumberger Holding Corporation and Rain Merger Sub (both of which are indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries).   These lawsuits were consolidated for all purposes and a consolidated amended class action complaint (the “Consolidated Complaint”) was filed. The Consolidated Complaint seeks various remedies, including enjoining the merger from being consummated, rescission of the merger to the extent already implemented and the plaintiffs’ costs and fees.  Additional lawsuits with similar allegations may be filed. While we believe these lawsuits are without merit and we intend to vigorously defend against such claims, the outcome of any such litigation is inherently uncertain.  One of the conditions to the closing of the merger is that no law, order, injunction, judgment, decree, ruling or other similar requirement shall be in effect that prohibits the completion of the merger. Accordingly, if any of the plaintiffs are successful in obtaining an injunction prohibiting the completion of the merger, then that injunction may prevent the merger from becoming effective, or delay its becoming effective. We may fail to realize the anticipated benefits of the proposed merger. The success of the proposed merger will depend on, among other things, our ability to combine our business with that of Cameron in a manner that facilitates growth opportunities and realizes anticipated synergies. However, we must successfully combine both businesses in a manner that permits these benefits to be realized. In addition, we must achieve the anticipated synergies without 10 adversely affecting current revenues and investments in future growth. If we are not able to successfully achieve these objectives, the anticipated benefits of the merger may not be realized fully , may take longer to realize than expected , or may never be realized . Potential issues and difficulties we may encounter in the integration process include the following: Business issues currently faced by Cameron may impact our operations. To the extent that Cameron currently has or is perceived by customers to have operational challenges, such as on-time performance, safety issues or workforce issues, those challenges may raise concerns by our existing customers following the merger, which may limit or impede our future ability to obtain additional work from those customers. Item 1B.  Unresolved Staff Comments. None. Item 2.  Properties. Schlumberger owns or leases numerous manufacturing facilities, administrative offices, service centers, research centers, data processing centers, mines, ore, drilling fluid and production chemical processing centers, sales offices and warehouses throughout the world. Schlumberger views its principal manufacturing, mining and processing facilities, research centers and data processing centers as its “principal owned or leased facilities.” The following sets forth Schlumberger’s principal owned or leased facilities: Beijing, China; Clamart, France; Fuchinobe, Japan; Oslo and Stavanger, Norway; Singapore; Abingdon, Cambridge, Gatwick and Stonehouse, United Kingdom; Moscow, Russia; and within the United States: Boston, Massachusetts; Houston, Katy, Rosharon and Sugar Land, Texas; Battle Mountain, Nevada; Greybull, Wyoming and Florence, Kentucky. Item 3.  Legal Proceedings. The information with respect to this Item 3. Legal Proceedings is set forth in Note 16 of the Consolidated Financial Statements . Item 4.  Mine Safety Disclosures. The barite and bentonite mining operations of M-I LLC, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary, are subject to regulation by the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration under the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977. Information concerning mine safety violations or other regulatory matters required by section 1503(a) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and Item 104 of Regulation S-K is included in Exhibit 95 to this Form 10-K. 11 PART II Item 5.  Market for Schlumberger’s Common Stock, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities. As of December 31, 2015, there were 23,831 stockholders of record. The principal United States market for Schlumberger’s common stock is the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”), where it is traded under the symbol “SLB,” although it is traded on other exchanges in and outside the United States, including the Euronext Paris, the London Stock Exchange and the SIX Swiss Exchange. Common Stock, Market Prices and Dividends Declared per Share Quarterly high and low prices for Schlumberger’s common stock as reported by the NYSE (composite transactions), together with dividends declared per share in each quarter of 2015 and 2014, were as follows: There are no legal restrictions on the payment of dividends or ownership or voting of such shares, except as to shares held as treasury stock. Under current legislation, stockholders are not subject to any Curaçao withholding or other Curaçao taxes attributable to the ownership of such shares. The following graph compares the cumulative total stockholder return on Schlumberger common stock, assuming reinvestment of dividends on the last day of the month of payment into common stock of Schlumberger, with the cumulative total return on the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index (S&P 500 Index) and the cumulative total return on the Philadelphia Oil Service Index (OSX) over the five-year period ended December 31, 2015. The stockholder return set forth below is not necessarily indicative of future performance. The following graph and related information shall not be deemed “soliciting material” or to be “filed” with the SEC, nor shall such information be incorporated by reference into any future filing under the Securities Act of 1933 or the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, except to the extent that Schlumberger specifically incorporates it by reference into such filing. 12 Comparison of five-year cumulative total return among Schlumberger common stock, the S&P 500 Index and the Philadelphia Oil Service Index (OSX) Assumes $100 invested on December 31, 2010 in Schlumberger common stock, in the S&P 500 Index and in the Philadelphia Oil Service Index (OSX) and reinvestment of dividends on the last day of the month of payment. Share Repurchases On July 18, 2013, the Schlumberger Board of Directors (the “Board”) approved a $10 billion share repurchase program for Schlumberger common stock, to be completed at the latest by June 30, 2018. Schlumberger’s common stock repurchase program activity for the three months ended December 31, 2015 was as follows: In connection with the exercise of stock options under Schlumberger’s stock incentive plans, Schlumberger routinely receives shares of its common stock from optionholders in consideration of the exercise price of the stock options. Schlumberger does not view these transactions as requiring disclosure under this Item 5 as the number of shares of Schlumberger common stock received from optionholders is not material. On January 21, 2016, the Board approved a new $10 billion share repurchase program for Schlumberger common stock.  This new program will take effect once the remaining $1.4 billion authorized to be repurchased under the July 18, 2013 program is exhausted. 13 Unregistered Sales of Eq uity Securities None. Item 6.  Selected Financial Data. The following selected consolidated financial data should be read in conjunction with both “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K in order to understand factors, such as business combinations and charges and credits, which may affect the comparability of the Selected Financial Data: 14 Item 7 . Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operati ons. The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements, including, without limitation, statements relating to our plans, strategies, objectives, expectations, intentions and resources. Such forward-looking statements should be read in conjunction with our disclosures under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K. Executive Overview Schlumberger revenue of $35.5 billion in 2015 represented a drop of 27% from 2014 due to customer spending falling as commodity prices weakened during the year. Revenue in North America decreased 39%, driven by a land rig count that ended the year 68% lower than the peak seen in 2014 as well as by pricing pressure that intensified during the year. North American offshore revenue fell more modestly as rigs in the US Gulf of Mexico shifted from exploration to development work, although the overall market in North America was the weakest for oilfield services since 1986. Internationally, revenue declined 21% as customers cut budgets and pressured service pricing, with these effects often exacerbated by activity disruptions, project delays and cancellations. In the oil markets, the negative sentiments that had dominated the year accelerated during the fourth quarter after some early optimism earlier in the summer. The impact of OPEC lifting production targets to produce at maximum rates, combined with production in North America from unconventional resources declining slower than expected following the April peak, has led to supply continuing to exceed increasing demand. As a result, commodity prices fell dramatically, with oil dropping to a 12-year low by the end of the year. These weaker fundamentals drove industry exploration and production (E&P) capital investment significantly lower, resulting in the first two-year sequential decline in spend in 30 years. In the natural gas markets, US production grew to a record of 75 Bcf/d, as new fields in the US Gulf of Mexico were brought into production and supplies from unconventional shale gas and tight oil reservoirs continued to grow. This trend is expected to continue with newly completed pipeline capacity in the northeast United States bringing new supplies. A relatively mild start to the winter together with North American gas storage levels well above the five-year average will keep natural gas prices low. Internationally, European gas demand growth returned to positive territory.  Despite this increased demand, storage levels are at record highs due to ample supply from the North Sea and Russia, as well as from liquefied natural gas (LNG). Demand rebounded in Asia but remained in a downward trend overall. As LNG exports from Australia grow, the region is likely to remain oversupplied with low natural gas prices persisting. Schlumberger’s financial performance in 2015 was significantly impacted by the large decrease in land activity, particularly in the US, where the year-end land rig count was less than 700 rigs. This created massive overcapacity in the land market that impacted pricing levels across a broad range of oilfield services. Internationally, revenue in the Europe, CIS & Africa Area fell by 26% as a result of the weakening Russian ruble, and due to a drop in exploration activities in the United Kingdom and Norway GeoMarkets. In Latin America, revenue declined 22% due to decreased activity in Mexico, Brazil, and Colombia as a result of sustained budget cuts that led to rig count reductions. Middle East & Asia Area revenue decreased 17% on lower activity in the Asia Pacific region, particularly in Australia, although this was partially offset by robust activity in the Gulf Cooperation Council countries, particularly Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Oman. Among the Groups, Reservoir Characterization performance was negatively impacted by sustained cuts in exploration spending, currency weaknesses, and operational disruptions from exhausted customer budgets that affected Wireline activities, particularly in the Europe, CIS & Africa and Middle East & Asia Areas. In the Drilling Group, the drop in drilling activity coupled with persistent pricing pressure, currency weaknesses and operational disruptions lowered Drilling & Measurements and M-I SWACO revenues across all geographies but most significantly in the Europe, CIS & Africa Area. Production Group performance was mainly affected by the fall in North American land activity as exhausted customer budgets led to a continued decline in rig count and increased pricing pressure. In this uncertain environment, Schlumberger continues to focus on what it can control.  Throughout the year, Schlumberger took a number of actions to streamline and resize its organization as it continues to navigate the current market downturn. In spite of current conditions, Schlumberger remains constructive in its view of the market outlook in the medium term, and continues to believe that the underlying balance of supply and demand will tighten, driven by growth in demand, weakening supply as the massive E&P investment cuts take effect, and by the size of the annual supply replacement challenge. 15 Fourth Quarter 2015 Results Product Groups Geographic Areas Fourth-quarter revenue of $7.7 billion decreased $728 million, or 9%, sequentially with International revenue of $5.7 billion decreasing $354 million, or 6%, and North America revenue decreasing $318 million, or 14%.  Pricing pressure accounted for more than one-third of the overall sequential revenue decline, with the remainder attributable to a combination of lower activity levels and currency impacts. Internationally, fourth-quarter revenue decreased 6% sequentially due to the combination of customer budget cuts, the start of the seasonal winter slow-down, persistent pricing pressure, currency weakness and the near absence of the usual year-end product, software, and multiclient seismic license sales.  Europe/CIS/Africa Area revenue decreased 9% sequentially mainly in Russia and 16 Central Asia due to weakness in the Russi an ruble, the start of the seasonal winter slow-down in Russia as summer projects wound down, and activity reductions in the Caspian region.  Solid activity in the Nigeria & Gulf of Guinea and North Africa GeoMarkets was offset largely by lower activity in the UK, Central & West Africa and Angola GeoMarkets as rig count declined and projects ended.  Middle East & Asia Area revenue declined 5% sequentially mainly due to lower activity in Australia and the Asia-Pacific region as a result of customer budget cu ts and project completions.  Revenue from the Middle East GeoMarket s was also lower as solid activity in Kuwait and Iraq was more than offset by reductions in the rest of the region due to the effects of service pricing concessions, project cancellations, delayed start-ups of new projects, and abrupt activity disruptions as budgets were exhausted. Latin America Area revenue decreased 1% sequentially, mainly on significantly lower activity in the Colombia & Peru, Brazil, and Argentina, Bolivia & Chile GeoMar kets due to customer budget cuts and currency weakness.  These effects were largely offset by multiclient seismic license sales in Mexico. North America fourth-quarter revenue declined 14% sequentially, largely mirroring the US land rig count decline of 15% as customer cash flows diminished and E&P budgets were exhausted. Land revenue fell 18% from lower activity and persistent pricing pressure, while offshore revenue decreased 4%. The usual year-end surge in multiclient seismic license sales was largely muted. Fourth-quarter pretax operating income of $1.3 billion decreased $233 million, or 15%, sequentially with International pretax operating income of $1.26 billion decreasing 13%, and North America pretax operating income decreasing 31%. Fourth-quarter 2015 pretax operating margin of 16.6% decreased 132 basis points (bps) sequentially.  Internationally, pretax operating margin of 22.0% decreased 170 bps sequentially as pricing pressure across the Areas was partially offset by streamlining the cost and resource base.  In addition, project cancellations, delayed start-ups of new projects, and abrupt activity disruptions all contributed to the sequential reduction in pretax operating margin, particularly in the Middle East & Asia Area.  Middle East & Asia pretax operating margin decreased 448 bps to 22.5%, Europe/CIS/Africa fell 138 bps to 20.8%, while Latin America increased 229 bps to 23.0% mainly due to strong margins from multiclient seismic license sales in Mexico and Central America.  North America pretax operating margin declined 175 bps 7.1% as a result of pricing pressure that impacted all services and products. Reservoir Characterization Group Fourth-quarter revenue of $2.2 billion declined 7% sequentially, primarily due to sustained cuts in exploration spending, the start of the seasonal winter slow-down, currency weakness, and operational disruptions from exhausted customer budgets that impacted Wireline activities, particularly in the Europe/CIS/Africa and Middle East & Asia Areas.  This decline was partially offset by marine seismic surveys and multiclient seismic license sales in Mexico.  Year-end product and software sales were largely muted. Pretax operating margin of 24.2% declined 230 bps sequentially as the contribution of high-margin multiclient seismic sales was more than offset by a decline in high-margin Wireline services. Drilling Group Fourth-quarter revenue of $3.0 billion decreased 8% sequentially, primarily from a drop in drilling activity, persistent pricing pressure, the start of the seasonal winter slow-down, currency weakness, and operational disruptions from exhausted customer budgets that impacted Drilling & Measurements and M-I SWACO revenues, mainly in the Europe/CIS/Africa and Middle East & Asia Areas. Pretax operating margin of 16.7% contracted 173 bps sequentially as revenue declined on pricing weakness and abrupt operational disruptions. Production Group Fourth-quarter revenue of $2.7 billion decreased 10% sequentially with 80% of the decrease attributable to a further decline in North American land activity as exhausted customer budgets led to a further decline in rig count and increased pricing pressure. Market pricing for pressure pumping services dropped to even more unsustainable levels. Pretax operating margin of 11.3% increased 24 bps sequentially despite lower activity and increasing pricing weakness in pressure pumping services.  The decline in pressure pumping margin was largely offset by the combination of accretive margin contributions from Schlumberger Production Management projects in Latin America and higher net earnings from the OneSubsea joint venture. 17 Full-Year 2015 Results Product Groups Geographic Areas Full-year 2015 revenue of $35.5 billion decreased $13.1 billion, or 27%, versus the same period last year with International revenue of $25.2 billion decreasing $6.9 billion, or 21%, and North America revenue of $9.8 billion decreasing $6.3 billion, or 39%. Internationally, revenue decreased 21% year-on-year due to customer budget cuts and service pricing concessions as customers responded to lower commodity prices. Revenue was also impacted by the fall of certain currencies against the US dollar, which accounted for more than one-third of the revenue decline. Europe/CIS/Africa Area revenue decreased 26%, mainly due to the 18 weakness in the Russian ruble.  Exploration activities in the UK and Norway fell as customer spending decelerated.  In Sub-Saharan Africa, offshore rigs demobilized as explora tion decreased.  In North Africa, work progressed slowly while Libya activity remained muted, as onshore operations were limited due to security concerns.  Revenue in the Latin America Area declined 22 % due to significantly lower activity levels in Mexico, Brazil and Colombia because of sustained budget cuts that led to rig count reductions. The impact of the devaluation of the Venezuela bolivar also affected the revenue decline in the Venezuela, Trinidad and Tobago GeoMarket. Middle East & Asia Area rev enue decreased 17 % due to a double-digit drop in revenue in the Asia-Pacific region, particularly in Australia. This decrease arose from reduced activity and pricing concessions, but was partially offset by robust activity in the Gulf Cooperation Council countries in the Middle East, particularly in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Oman. Activity in Iraq continued to decline. North America full-year 2015 revenue decreased 39% year-on-year mainly from land which was down 45%, while offshore decreased 17% compared to the same period of 2014. The decrease in land was driven by severe activity and pricing declines as customer spending was cut.  With the year-end US land rig count 68% lower than the 2014 peak, the massive over-capacity in the land services market offers no signs of pricing recovery in the short- to medium-term.  Offshore activity in the US Gulf of Mexico remained resilient, although revenue did decline as work shifted from exploration to development activities driven by customer budget cuts. Full-year 2015 pretax operating income of $6.5 billion decreased $4.1 billion, or 38%, versus the same period last year with International pretax operating income of $6.0 billion decreasing 22% and North America pretax operating income of $1.0 billion decreasing 67%. Full-year 2015 pretax operating margin of 18.4% decreased 342 bps compared to 2014.  Internationally, pretax operating margin of 23.6% decreased 29 bps year-on-year.  Middle East & Asia pretax operating margin decreased 67 bps to 26.9%, Latin America expanded 58 bps to 21.9%, and Europe/CIS/Africa declined 79 bps to 21.3%.  Despite the revenue decline from pricing concessions and an increasingly unfavorable shift in revenue mix from offshore exploration to development, pretax operating margins were essentially flat internationally as a result of proactive cost and resource management.  North America pretax operating margin declined 874 bps year-on-year to 10.2% on decreased pressure pumping activity and pricing weakness on land. Reservoir Characterization Group Full-year 2015 revenue of $9.5 billion was 26% lower than the same period last year primarily due to sustained customer cuts in exploration and discretionary spending that impacted Wireline and Testing Technologies and software sales.  Revenue also decreased due to lower WesternGeco marine vessel utilization and reduced multiclient sales. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin decreased 294 bps to 25.8% as a result of an unfavorable overall revenue mix reflecting the decline in high-margin exploration activity as well as lower high-margin multiclient and software sales. Drilling Group Full-year 2015 revenue of $13.6 billion was 25% lower than the previous year primarily due to the severe drop in rig count in North America, reduced activity levels and service pricing concessions internationally that mainly affected Drilling & Measurements and M-I SWACO technologies. Unfavorable currency effects in Russia and Venezuela also contributed to the decline. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin decreased 228 bps to 18.7%, primarily due to a decrease in higher-margin activities of Drilling & Measurements as well as pricing concessions.  Despite the revenue decline, prompt action on cost management and the benefit of a local cost structure that minimized the impact of unfavorable currency effects on pretax operating income helped limit the operating margin decline. Production Group Full-year 2015 revenue of $12.5 billion decreased 29% year-on-year, with approximately two-thirds of the decline attributable to Well Services pressure pumping technologies as a result of activity reductions and pricing pressure as the land rig count declined dramatically in North America. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin declined 535 bps to 12.6% as lower activity and increasing pricing pressure continued in North America land. 19 Full-Year 2014 Results Product Groups Geographic Areas Full-year 2014 revenue of $48.6 billion grew $3.3 billion, or 7%, versus the same period last year with International revenue of $32.1 billion increasing $1.2 billion, or 4%, and North America revenue of $16.2 billion growing $2.3 billion, or 16%. Internationally, higher activities in a number of GeoMarkets, both offshore and in key land markets, contributed to the increase.  The increase was led by the Middle East & Asia, which increased 10%, mainly from robust drilling and exploration results in Saudi Arabia, Australia, the United Arab Emirates and Oman.  Europe/CIS/Africa increased 1%, led by the Sub-Saharan Africa region on strong 20 dev elopment and exploration activities , particularly in Central West Africa, Angola and Continental Europe GeoMarkets.  Norway also experienced strong growth driven by market share gains and higher rig - related services for a number of customers.  Latin Americ a, however, decreased 1 % primarily because of lower activity and pricing in Brazil and Mexico which was partially offset by strong activit y in Argentina and Ecuador. North America revenue increased 16% mainly due to land, which was up 22%, while offshore was down 3%.  The increase in land was driven by market share gains in pressure pumping, artificial lift and drilling services.   The pressure pumping growth was augmented by improvements in operational efficiency and the introduction of new technologies.  The decrease in offshore revenue was attributable to lower drilling and exploration activities, and due to a series of operational delays that impacted several product lines earlier in the year combined with lower multiclient sales. Full-year 2014 pretax operating income of $10.6 billion grew $1.2 billion, or 13%, versus the same period last year with International pretax operating income of $7.7 billion increasing 12% and North America pretax operating income of $3.1 billion increasing 12%. Full-year 2014 pretax operating margin of 21.8% increased 113 bps compared to 2013, as pretax operating margins internationally were up 168 bps, to 23.9%, while North America pretax operating margin was down 75 bps, to 18.9%.  The increase in International Area margins reflected increased high-margin exploration activities, market share gains, growth in accretive integration-related activities and premium pricing on new technology introductions.  The North America margin contraction reflected pressure pumping commodity inflation. Reservoir Characterization Group Full-year 2014 revenue of $12.9 billion was down 1% compared to 2013.  Revenue increased in Testing Services, from higher offshore exploration, and Software Integrated Solutions, driven by software sales across all international areas.  However, these increases were offset by lower WesternGeco marine vessel utilization and reduced multiclient seismic sales. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin increased 30 bps, to 28.7%, largely due to the higher-margin exploration activities that benefited Wireline Technologies and Testing Services.  Higher margin software sales also contributed to the improvement.   These increases were partially offset by lower profitability in WesternGeco due to lower vessel utilization and multiclient seismic sales. Drilling Group Full-year 2014 revenue of $18.1 billion was 8% higher than 2013, primarily due to the robust demand for Drilling & Measurements services and M-I SWACO Technologies as activity strengthened in the North America and Middle East & Asia Areas.  Land Rig revenue from the May 2014 acquisition of Saxon also contributed to the growth. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin increased 171 bps, to 21.0%, primarily due to the increase in higher-margin exploration activities of Drilling & Measurements in North America offshore and in the international markets.  Improved profitability on Integrated Drilling Services activities also contributed to the margin increase. Production Group Full-year 2014 revenue of $17.8 billion increased 14% compared to 2013, primarily from Well Services pressure pumping technologies driven by market share gains, improvements in operational efficiency and the introduction of new technologies.  Schlumberger Production Management (SPM) revenue grew as projects in Latin America continued to progress ahead of work plans.  Revenue from the expanding artificial lift business also contributed to the year-on-year growth. Year-on-year, pretax operating margin increased 121 bps, to 18.0%, mainly on improved profitability for Well Services and Well Intervention, particularly internationally.  SPM activities also contributed to the margin expansion.  However, these improvements were partially offset by the decrease in margins in North America due to pressure pumping commodity cost inflation. 21 Interest and Other Income Interest and other income consisted of the following: The decrease in earnings of equity method investments in 2015 as compared to 2014 primarily reflects the effects of the downturn in the oil and gas industry, which has negatively impacted the majority of Schlumberger’s investments in affiliates, particularly those in North America. The increase in earnings of equity method investments in 2014 as compared to 2013 primarily reflects the strong performance of a drilling service company in which Schlumberger has an investment, as well as the impact of the first full year of results from the OneSubsea joint venture. Interest Expense Interest expense of $346 million in 2015 decreased by $23 million compared to 2014 primarily as the effect of an increase in the weighted average debt balance of approximately $0.5 billion was more than offset by a 30 bps decrease in the weighted average borrowing rates from 2.8% in 2014 to 2.5% in 2015. Interest expense of $369 million in 2014 decreased by $22 million compared to 2013 primarily as the effect of an increase in the weighted average debt balance of approximately $1.1 billion was more than offset by a 40 bps decrease in the weighted average borrowing rates from 3.2% in 2013 to 2.8% in 2014. Other Research & engineering and General & administrative expenses, as a percentage of Revenue , were as follows: Income Taxes The Schlumberger effective tax rate was 25.9% in 2015, 25.2% in 2014, and 21.3% in 2013. The Schlumberger effective tax rate is sensitive to the geographic mix of earnings. When the percentage of pretax earnings generated outside of North America increases, the Schlumberger effective tax rate will generally decrease. Conversely, when the percentage of pretax earnings generated outside of North America decreases, the Schlumberger effective tax rate will generally increase. The effective tax rate for each of 2015, 2014 and 2013 was significantly impacted by the charges and credits described in Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements because they were only partially tax effective.  Excluding the impact of these charges and credits, the effective tax rate was 20.2% in 2015, 21.9% in 2014 and 22.9% in 2013.  The decrease in the effective tax rate, excluding the impact of charges and credits, was primarily attributable to the change in the geographic mix of earnings and the favorable resolution of tax examinations in certain jurisdictions. Charges and Credits Schlumberger recorded significant charges and credits in continuing operations during 2015, 2014 and 2013. These charges and credits, which are summarized below, are more fully described in Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements . 22 The following is a summary of the 2015 charges and credits , all of which were classified as Impairments & other in the Consolidated Statemen t of Income : The following is a summary of the 2014 charges and credits, all of which were classified as Impairments & other in the Consolidated Statement of Income : The following is a summary of the 2013 charges and credits: Net Debt Net Debt represents gross debt less cash, short-term investments and fixed income investments, held to maturity. Management believes that Net Debt provides useful information regarding the level of Schlumberger’s indebtedness by reflecting cash and investments that could be used to repay debt. 23 Details of changes in Net Debt follow: Key liquidity events during 2015, 2014 and 2013 included: 24 In order to partially fund the purchase of the 137 million shares of common stock from Schlumberger Limited that will be transferred to Cameron stockholders, Schlumberger Holdings Corporation issued the following notes during the fourth quarter of 2015: Schlumberger Holdings Corporation expects to use a combination of cash on hand and commercial paper borrowings to finance the difference between the proceeds received from the issuance of these notes and the cash required to complete the Cameron merger. On July 18, 2013, the Board approved a new $10 billion share repurchase program to be completed at the latest by June 30, 2018. Schlumberger had repurchased $8.6 billion of shares under this new share repurchase program as of December 31, 2015. The following table summarizes the activity under these share repurchase programs during 2015, 2014 and 2013: On January 21, 2016, the Board approved a new $10 billion share repurchase program for Schlumberger common stock.  This new program will take effect once the remaining $1.4 billion authorized to be repurchased under the July 18, 2013 program is exhausted. On January 15, 2015, Schlumberger announced that its Board approved a 25% increase in the quarterly dividend, to $0.50. On January 16, 2014, Schlumberger announced that its Board approved a 28% increase in the quarterly dividend, to $0.40. 25 Schlumberger’s international defined benefit pension plans were a combined 93% funded at December 31, 2015 based on the projected benefit obligation. This compares to 94% funded at December 31, 2014. Schlumberger currently anticipates contributing approximately $350 million to its postretirement benefit plans in 2016, subject to market and business conditions. Schlumberger maintains a €5.0 billion Guaranteed Euro Medium Term Note program. This program provides for the issuance of various types of debt instruments such as fixed or floating rate notes in Euro, US dollar or other currencies.  Schlumberger has issued €0.5 billion 1.50% Guaranteed Notes due 2019 under this program. As of December 31, 2015, Schlumberger had $13.0 billion of cash and short-term investments on hand. Schlumberger had separate committed debt facility agreements aggregating $3.8 billion with commercial banks, of which $1.4 billion was available and unused as of December 31, 2015. The $3.8 billion of committed debt facility agreements included $3.5 billion of committed facilities, which support commercial paper programs. Schlumberger believes that these amounts are sufficient to meet future business requirements for at least the next 12 months. The total outstanding commercial paper borrowings were $2.383 billion as of December 31, 2015 and $1.538 billion as of December 31, 2014. Summary of Contractual Obligations Refer to Note 18, Pension and Other Benefit Plans, of the Consolidated Financial Statements for details regarding Schlumberger’s pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. As discussed in Note 14, Income Taxes, of the Consolidated Financial Statements , included in the Schlumberger Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2015 is approximately $1.3 billion of liabilities associated with uncertain tax positions in the over 100 jurisdictions in which Schlumberger conducts business. Due to the uncertain and complex application of tax regulations, combined with the difficulty in predicting when tax audits throughout the world may be concluded, Schlumberger cannot make reliable estimates of the timing of cash outflows relating to these liabilities. Schlumberger has outstanding letters of credit/guarantees that relate to business performance bonds, custom/excise tax commitments, facility lease/rental obligations, etc. These were entered into in the ordinary course of business and are customary practices in the various countries where Schlumberger operates. 26 Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires Schlumberger to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses. The following accounting policies involve “critical accounting estimates” because they are particularly dependent on estimates and assumptions made by Schlumberger about matters that are inherently uncertain. Schlumberger bases its estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Multiclient Seismic Data Schlumberger capitalizes the costs associated with obtaining multiclient seismic data. The carrying value of the multiclient seismic data library at December 31, 2015 and 2014 was $1.03 billion and $793 million, respectively. Such costs are charged to Cost of revenue based on the percentage of the total costs to the estimated total revenue that Schlumberger expects to receive from the sales of such data. However, under no circumstances will an individual survey carry a net book value greater than a 4-year, straight-line amortized value. The carrying value of surveys is reviewed for impairment annually as well as when an event or change in circumstance indicates an impairment may have occurred. Adjustments to the carrying value are recorded when it is determined that estimated future revenues, which involve significant judgment on the part of Schlumberger, would not be sufficient to recover the carrying value of the surveys. Significant adverse changes in Schlumberger’s estimated future cash flows could result in impairment charges in a future period. For purposes of performing the annual impairment test of the multiclient library, larger surveys (which are typically prefunded by customers) are analyzed for impairment on a survey-by-survey basis and smaller surveys are analyzed based on two pools of surveys: United States and non-United States. The United States and non-United States pools were determined to be the most appropriate level at which to perform the impairment review based upon a number of factors, including (i) various macroeconomic factors that influence the ability to successfully market surveys, and (ii) the focus of the sales force and related costs. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts Schlumberger maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts in order to record accounts receivable at their net realizable value. Judgment is involved in recording and making adjustments to this reserve. Allowances have been recorded for receivables believed to be uncollectible, including amounts for the resolution of potential credit and other collection issues such as disputed invoices. Depending on how such potential issues are resolved, or if the financial condition of Schlumberger customers were to deteriorate resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, adjustments to the allowance may be required. Schlumberger operates in more than 85 countries. At December 31, 2015, only four of those countries individually accounted for greater than 5% of Schlumberger’s accounts receivable balance, of which only two (Venezuela and Mexico) accounted for greater than 10%.  Schlumberger has experienced delays in payment from its national oil company customer in Venezuela.  During the fourth quarter of 2015, Schlumberger entered into an agreement with its national oil company customer in Venezuela to receive certain fixed assets in lieu of payment of approximately $200 million of accounts receivable. Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Long-Lived Assets Schlumberger records the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed as goodwill. The goodwill relating to each of Schlumberger’s reporting units is tested for impairment annually as well as when an event, or change in circumstances, indicates an impairment may have occurred. Under generally accepted accounting principles, Schlumberger has the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of one of its reporting units is greater than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, Schlumberger determines it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, there is no need to perform any further testing. However, if Schlumberger concludes otherwise, then it is required to perform the first step of a two-step impairment test by calculating the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing the fair value with the carrying amount of the reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded to the extent that the implied fair value of the goodwill of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Schlumberger has the option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly to performing the first step of the two-step goodwill impairment test. 27 For purposes of performing the i mpairment test for goodwill, Schlumberger’s reporting units are its three Groups: Reservoir Characterization, Drilling and Production. Schlumberger elected to perform the qualitative assessment described above for purposes of its annual goodwill impairment test in 2015 . Based on this assessment, Schlumberger concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of each of its reporting units was greater than its carrying amount. Accordingly, no further testing was required. Long-lived assets, including fixed assets, intangible assets and investments in SPM projects, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. In reviewing for impairment, the carrying value of such assets is compared to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. If such cash flows are not sufficient to support the asset’s recorded value, an impairment charge is recognized to reduce the carrying value of the long-lived asset to its estimated fair value, as was the case for certain assets in 2015 and 2014. The determination of future cash flows as well as the estimated fair value of long-lived assets involves significant estimates on the part of management. If there is a material change in economic conditions or other circumstances influencing the estimate of future cash flows or fair value, Schlumberger could be required to recognize impairment charges in the future. Income Taxes Schlumberger conducts business in more than 100 tax jurisdictions, a number of which have tax laws that are not fully defined and are evolving. Schlumberger’s tax filings are subject to regular audits by the tax authorities. These audits may result in assessments for additional taxes that are resolved with the authorities or, potentially, through the courts. Schlumberger recognizes the impact of a tax position in its financial statements if that position is more likely than not of being sustained on audit, based on the technical merits of the position.  Tax liabilities are recorded based on estimates of additional taxes which will be due upon the conclusion of these audits. Estimates of these tax liabilities are made based upon prior experience and are updated in light of changes in facts and circumstances. However, due to the uncertain and complex application of tax regulations, the ultimate resolution of audits may result in liabilities that could be materially different from these estimates. In such an event, Schlumberger will record additional tax expense or tax benefit in the period in which such resolution occurs. Pension and Postretirement Benefits Schlumberger’s pension and postretirement benefit obligations are described in detail in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements . The obligations and related costs are calculated using actuarial concepts, which include critical assumptions related to the discount rate, expected rate of return on plan assets and medical cost trend rates. These assumptions are important elements of expense and/or liability measurement and are updated on an annual basis, or upon the occurrence of significant events. The discount rate that Schlumberger uses reflects the prevailing market rate of a portfolio of high-quality debt instruments with maturities matching the expected timing of the payment of the benefit obligations. The following summarizes the discount rates utilized by Schlumberger for its various pension and postretirement benefit plans: The expected rate of return for Schlumberger’s retirement benefit plans represents the average rate of return expected to be earned on plan assets over the period that benefits included in the benefit obligation are expected to be paid. The expected rate of return for Schlumberger’s United States pension plans has been determined based upon expected rates of return for the investment portfolio, with consideration given to the distribution of investments by asset class and historical rates of return for each individual asset class. The weighted average expected rate of return on plan assets for the United States pension plans was 7.25% in both 2015 and 2014. The weighted average expected rate of return on plan assets for the international pension plans was 7.50% in both 2015 and 2014.  A lower expected rate of return would increase pension expense. Schlumberger’s medical cost trend rate assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, the near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends. The overall medical cost trend rate assumption utilized to determine the 2015 postretirement medical expense was 7.0% graded to 5.0% over the next ten years. The overall medical trend rate assumption utilized to determine the postretirement medical liability at December 31, 2015 was 7.0% graded to 5.0% over the next ten years. 28 The following illustrates the sensitivity to changes in certain assumptions, holding all other assumptions constant, for the United States and international pension plans: The following illustrates the sensitivity to changes in certain assumptions, holding all other assumptions constant, for Schlumberger’s United States postretirement medical plans: Investments in Affiliated Companies Investments in Affiliated Companies on the consolidated balance sheet primarily reflects Schlumberger’s investments in privately held companies, some of which are in the startup or development stages and are often still defining their strategic direction. Such investments are inherently risky and their success is dependent on factors such as technology development, market acceptance and their ability to raise additional funds. The technology being developed by these companies may never materialize and they could fail. Schlumberger monitors its portfolio to determine if any investment is other-than-temporarily impaired. If an investment is considered to be other-than-temporarily impaired, it is written down to its fair value, as was the case for certain investments in 2015 and 2013. Item 7A.  Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk. Schlumberger is subject to market risks primarily associated with changes in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates. As a multinational company, Schlumberger conducts business in approximately 85 countries. Schlumberger’s functional currency is primarily the US dollar, which is consistent with the oil and gas industry. Approximately 83% of Schlumberger’s revenue in 2015 was denominated in US dollars. However, outside the United States, a significant portion of Schlumberger’s expenses is incurred in foreign currencies. Therefore, when the US dollar weakens in relation to the foreign currencies of the countries in which Schlumberger conducts business, the US dollar-reported expenses will increase. A 5% increase or decrease in the average exchange rates of all the foreign currencies in 2015 would have changed revenue by approximately 1%. If the 2015 average exchange rates of the US dollar against all foreign currencies had strengthened by 5%, Schlumberger’s pretax operating income would have increased by approximately 3%. Conversely, a 5% weakening of the US dollar average exchange rates would have decreased pretax operating income by approximately 3%. Please refer to Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of exchange rates as it relates to Schlumberger’s operations in Venezuela. 29 Schlumberger maintains a foreign-currency risk management strategy that uses derivative instruments to protect its interests from unanticipated fluctuations in earnings and cash flows caused by volatility in currency exchange rates. Foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency options provide a hedge against currency fluctuations either on monetary assets/liabilities denom inated in other than a functional currency or on expenses. At December 31, 2015, contracts were outstanding for the US dollar equivalent of $3.8 billion in various foreign currencies of which $1.2 billion relate to hedges of debt balances denominated in currencies other than the functional currency. Schlumberger is subject to interest rate risk on its debt and its investment portfolio. Schlumberger maintains an interest rate risk management strategy that uses a mix of variable and fixed rate debt combined with its investment portfolio and occasionally interest rate swaps to mitigate the exposure to changes in interest rates. At December 31, 2015, Schlumberger had fixed rate debt aggregating approximately $14.3 billion and variable rate debt aggregating approximately $4.7 billion before considering the effects of cross currency swaps. Schlumberger’s exposure to interest rate risk associated with its debt is also partially mitigated by its investment portfolio. Both Short-term investments and Fixed income investments , held to maturity , which totaled approximately $10.7 billion at December 31, 2015, are comprised primarily of money market funds, time deposits, certificates of deposit, commercial paper, bonds and notes, substantially all of which are denominated in US dollars. The average return on investments was 1.0% in 2015. The following table represents the carrying amounts of Schlumberger’s debt at December 31, 2015 by year of maturity: The fair market value of the outstanding fixed rate debt was approximately $14.3 billion as of December 31, 2015. The weighted average interest rate on the variable rate debt as of December 31, 2015 was 1.0%. Schlumberger does not enter into derivatives for speculative purposes. 30 Forward-looking Statements This Form 10-K and other statements we make contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the federal securities laws, which include any statements that are not historical facts, such as our forecasts or expectations regarding business outlook; growth for Schlumberger as a whole and for each of its segments (and for specified products or geographic areas within each segment); oil and natural gas demand and production growth; oil and natural gas prices; improvements in operating procedures and technology; capital expenditures by Schlumberger and the oil and gas industry; the business strategies of Schlumberger’s customers; the integration of Cameron into our business; the anticipated benefits of the Cameron transaction; the success of Schlumberger’s joint ventures and alliances; future global economic conditions; and future results of operations. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, global economic conditions; changes in exploration and production spending by Schlumberger’s customers and changes in the level of oil and natural gas exploration and development; general economic, political and business conditions in key regions of the world; pricing erosion; weather and seasonal factors; operational modifications, delays or cancellations; production declines; changes in government regulations and regulatory requirements, including those related to offshore oil and gas exploration, radioactive sources, explosives, chemicals, hydraulic fracturing services and climate-related initiatives; the inability of technology to meet new challenges in exploration; the risk that the contemplated Cameron merger will not occur, negative effects from the pendency of the contemplated Cameron merger; the inability after the closing of the Cameron merger to successfully integrate the merged businesses and to realize expected synergies; the inability to retain key employees; expenses for the merger; and other risks and uncertainties detailed in the Risk Factors section of this Form 10-K and other filings that we make with the Securities and Exchange Commission. If one or more of these or other risks or uncertainties materialize (or the consequences of such a development changes), or should our underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual outcomes may vary materially from those reflected in our forward-looking statements. Schlumberger disclaims any intention or obligation to update publicly or revise such statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. 31 Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF INCOME (1) Amounts may not add due to rounding. See the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 32 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME See the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 33 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET See the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 34 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS See the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 35 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY See the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 36 SCHLUMBERGER LIMITED AND SUBSIDIARIES SHARES OF COMMON STOCK See the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 37 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 1. Business Description Schlumberger Limited (Schlumberger N.V., incorporated in Curaçao) and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, “Schlumberger”) comprise the world’s leading supplier of technology, integrated project management and information solutions to the international oil and gas exploration and production industry. On August 26, 2015, Schlumberger and Cameron International Corporations (Cameron) jointly announced that they had entered into a definitive merger agreement in which Cameron will merge with an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of Schlumberger in a stock and cash transaction. Cameron designs, manufactures, markets and services equipment used by the oil and gas industry and industrial manufacturing companies. Under the terms of the merger agreement, Cameron shareholders will receive 0.716 shares of Schlumberger common stock and a cash payment of $14.44 in exchange for each Cameron share of common stock outstanding. Schlumberger estimates that it will issue approximately 137 million shares of its common stock and pay cash of approximately $2.8 billion in connection with this transaction. The transaction remains subject to certain regulatory approvals and customary closing conditions. It is anticipated that the closing of the transaction will occur in the first quarter of 2016.  Cameron reported revenue of $10.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2014. 2. Summary of Accounting Policies The Consolidated Financial Statements of Schlumberger have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Use of Estimates The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, Schlumberger evaluates its estimates, including those related to collectibility of accounts receivable; recoverability of fixed assets, goodwill, intangible assets, Schlumberger Production Management investments and investments in affiliates; income taxes; multiclient seismic data; contingencies and actuarial assumptions for employee benefit plans. Schlumberger bases its estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Revenue Recognition Schlumberger recognizes revenue based upon purchase orders, contracts or other persuasive evidence of an arrangement with the customer that include fixed or determinable prices provided that collectibility is reasonably assured. Revenue is recognized for services when they are rendered. Revenue is recognized for products upon delivery and when the customer assumes the risks and rewards of ownership. Revenue from seismic contract services performed on a dayrate basis is recognized as the service is performed. Revenue from other services, including pre-funded multiclient surveys, is recognized as the seismic data is acquired and/or processed on a proportionate basis as work is performed. This method requires revenue to be recognized based upon quantifiable measures of progress, such as square kilometers acquired. Multiclient data surveys are licensed or sold to customers on a non-transferable basis. Revenue from sales of completed multiclient data surveys is recognized upon obtaining a signed licensing agreement and providing customers with access to such data. Revenue is occasionally generated from contractual arrangements that include multiple deliverables. Revenue from these arrangements is recognized as each item is delivered based on their relative fair value, provided that the delivered items have stand-alone value to the customer. Revenue derived from the sale of licenses of Schlumberger software may include installation, maintenance, consulting and training services. If services are not essential to the functionality of the software, the revenue for each element of the contract is recognized separately based on its respective vendor specific objective evidence of fair value when all of the following conditions are met: a signed contract is obtained, delivery has occurred, the fee is fixed or determinable and collectibility is probable. Short-term and Fixed Income Investments The Consolidated Balance Sheet reflects the Schlumberger investment portfolio separated between current and long term, based on maturity. Both Short-term investments and Fixed Income Investments, held to maturity are comprised primarily of money market 38 funds, time deposits, certificates of deposit, commercial paper, bonds and notes, substantially all of which are denominated in US dollars. Under normal circumstances Schl umberger intends to hold such investments until maturity . These investments are stated at cost plus accrued interest, which approximates market. For purposes of the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows , Schlumberger does not consider Short-term investments to be cash equivalents. Fixed Income Investments, held to maturity at December 31, 2015 of $418 million mature as follows: $107 million in 2017, $298 million in 2018, $12 million in 2019 and $1 million in 2020. Investments in Affiliated Companies Investments in companies in which Schlumberger does not have a controlling financial interest, but over which it has significant influence are accounted for using the equity method. Schlumberger’s share of the after-tax earnings of equity method investees is included in Interest and other income . Investments in privately held companies in which Schlumberger does not have the ability to exercise significant influence are accounted for using the cost method. Investments in publicly traded companies in which Schlumberger does not have significant influence are accounted for as available-for-sale marketable securities. These marketable securities are reported at fair value, based on quoted market prices, with unrealized gains and losses reported as a component of Accumulated other comprehensive loss . The fair value of these marketable securities was $41 million at December 31, 2015 ($91 million at December 31, 2014).  The cost basis of these marketable securities was $41 million at December 31, 2015 ($81 million at December 31, 2014) after reflecting a $40 million other-than-temporary impairment charge recorded during the fourth quarter of 2015. Equity and cost method investments as well as investments in publicly traded companies are classified as Investments in Affiliated Companies in the Consolidated Balance Sheet . Multiclient Seismic Data The multiclient library consists of completed and in-process seismic surveys that are licensed on a nonexclusive basis. Schlumberger capitalizes costs directly incurred in acquiring and processing the multiclient seismic data. Such costs are charged to Cost of revenue based on the percentage of the total costs to the estimated total revenue that Schlumberger expects to receive from the sales of such data. However, under no circumstance will an individual survey carry a net book value greater than a 4-year, straight-line amortized value. The carrying value of the multiclient library is reviewed for impairment annually as well as when an event or change in circumstance indicating impairment may have occurred. Adjustments to the carrying value are recorded when it is determined that estimated future cash flows, which involves significant judgment on the part of Schlumberger, would not be sufficient to recover the carrying value of the surveys. Significant adverse changes in Schlumberger’s estimated future cash flows could result in impairment charges in a future period. Schlumberger Production Management Schlumberger Production Management (“SPM”) projects are focused on developing and co-managing the production of Schlumberger customers’ assets under long-term agreements.  Schlumberger will invest its own services, products and in some cases cash, into the field development activities and operations.  Although in certain arrangements Schlumberger is paid for a portion of the services or products it provides, generally Schlumberger will not be paid at the time of providing its services or upon delivery of its products. Instead, Schlumberger is compensated based upon cash flow generated or on a fee-per-barrel basis.  This may include certain arrangements whereby Schlumberger is only compensated based upon incremental production it helps deliver above a mutually agreed baseline. Schlumberger capitalizes its cash investments in a project as well as the direct costs associated with providing services or products for which Schlumberger will be compensated when the related production is achieved.  Revenue is recognized as the related production is achieved. These capitalized investments are amortized to the Consolidated Statement of Income as the related oil production is achieved based on the units of production method, whereby each unit produced is assigned a pro-rata portion of the unamortized costs based on estimated total production, resulting in a matching of revenue with the applicable costs. The unamortized portion of Schlumberger’s investments in SPM projects was approximately $1.829 billion and $1.411 billion at December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.  These amounts are included within Other Assets in Schlumberger’s Consolidated Balance Sheet . 39 Concentration of Credit Risk Schlumberger’s assets that are exposed to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of cash, short-term investments, fixed income investments held to maturity, receivables from clients and derivative financial instruments. Schlumberger places its cash, short-term investments and fixed income investments held to maturity with financial institutions and corporations, and limits the amount of credit exposure with any one of them. Schlumberger regularly evaluates the creditworthiness of the issuers in which it invests. By using derivative financial instruments to hedge certain exposures, Schlumberger exposes itself to some credit risk. Schlumberger minimizes this credit risk by entering into transactions with high-quality counterparties, limiting the exposure to each counterparty and monitoring the financial condition of its counterparties. Schlumberger operates in more than 85 countries and as such, its accounts receivable are spread over many countries and customers. As of December 31, 2015, only two countries (Venezuela and Mexico) individually accounted for greater than 10% of Schlumberger’s accounts receivable balance.  Schlumberger has experienced delays in payment from its national oil company customer in Venezuela.  Schlumberger maintains an allowance for uncollectible accounts receivable based on expected collectibility and performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition.  If the financial condition of its customers were to deteriorate resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, adjustments to the allowance may be required. Earnings per Share The following is a reconciliation from basic to diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of Schlumberger for each of the last three years: Employee stock options to purchase 20 million, 5 million and 12 million shares of common stock at December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively, were outstanding but not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the option exercise price was greater than the average market price of the common stock, and therefore the effect on diluted earnings per share would have been anti-dilutive. Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers . This ASU amends the existing accounting standards for revenue recognition and is based on the principle that revenue should be recognized to depict the transfer of goods or services to a customer at an amount that reflects the consideration a company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Schlumberger is required to adopt this ASU on January 1, 2018, with early adoption permitted on January 1, 2017, and does not expect this ASU to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. 40 In November 2015, the FASB issued ASU 2015-17 , Balance Sheet Classification of Deferred Taxes , which amends existing guidance o n income taxes to require the classification of all deferred tax assets and liabilities as non-current on the balance sheet. Schlumberger is required to adopt this ASU no later than January 1, 2018 , with early adoption permitted, and the guidance may be a pplied either prospectively or retrospectively.  Schlumberger does not expect this ASU to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. 3. Charges and Credits Schlumberger recorded the following charges and credits in continuing operations during 2015, 2014 and 2013: 2015 Because certain of these impairment charges were estimated based on the projected present value of future cash flows, which included unobservable inputs that required significant judgments, additional charges may be required in future periods should industry conditions worsen . This change results in a reduction in the US dollar reported amount of local currency denominated revenues, expenses and, consequently, income before taxes and net income in Venezuela. If Schlumberger had applied an exchange rate of 192 Venezuelan Bolivares fuertes to the US dollar throughout 2014, it would have reduced Schlumberger earnings by approximately $0.09 per share. 41 The following is a summary of these charges and credits , all of which were classified as Impairments & other in the Consolidated Statement of Income : 2014 As a result of this restructuring, Schlumberger performed an impairment test and determined that the carrying values of certain of its vessels exceeded their respective fair values by $590 million.  This impairment charge relates to the six Explorer-class vessels that were acquired at a premium in the 2007 purchase of Eastern Echo Holdings Plc.  The fair value of these vessels was estimated primarily based on the replacement cost method, which was largely based on unobservable inputs that required significant judgments. In addition to the $590 million impairment charge relating to these six vessels, Schlumberger also recorded an $85 million impairment charge relating to a seismic intangible asset and $131 million of other charges primarily related to lease termination costs and other seismic assets as a result of the restructuring.  Schlumberger did not incur any significant cash expenditures as a result of these charges. Schlumberger had historically applied the official exchange rate to remeasure local currency transactions and balances into US dollars.  Effective December 31, 2014, Schlumberger concluded that it was appropriate to apply the SICAD II exchange rate as it believed that rate best represented the economics of Schlumberger’s business activity in Venezuela.  As a result, Schlumberger recorded a $472 million devaluation charge during the fourth quarter of 2014. 42 The following is a summ ary of these charges , all of which were classified as Impairments & other in the Consolidated Statement of Income : 2013 The following is a summary of these charges and credits: 4. Acquisitions Formation of OneSubsea Joint Venture On June 30, 2013, Schlumberger and Cameron completed the formation of OneSubsea, a joint venture to manufacture and develop products, systems and services for the subsea oil and gas market. Schlumberger and Cameron each contributed all of their respective subsea businesses to the joint venture and Schlumberger made a $600 million cash payment to Cameron. Schlumberger owns 40% of OneSubsea and accounts for this investment under the equity method. Schlumberger recognized a pretax and after-tax gain of $1.028 billion, which is classified as Gain on formation of OneSubsea in the Consolidated Statement of Income , as a result of the deconsolidation of its subsea business. This gain is equal to the difference between the fair value of the Schlumberger subsea business, which was determined based on the present value of its estimated future cash flows, and its carrying value at the time of closing. Other Schlumberger made other acquisitions and investments for cash payments, net of cash acquired, of $443 million during 2015, $1.008 billion during 2014, and $610 million during 2013.  Additionally, during 2014 Schlumberger issued 2.1 million shares of its common stock, valued at $213 million, in connection with an acquisition.  None of these transactions were significant to Schlumberger’s consolidated financial statements, either individually or in the aggregate. 43 5. Inventories A summary of inventories, which are stated at the lower of average cost or market follows: 6. Fixed Assets A summary of fixed assets follows: The estimated useful lives of Buildings & improvements are primarily 25 to 30 years. The estimated useful lives of Machinery & equipment are primarily 5 to 10 years. Seismic vessels are depreciated over periods ranging from 20 to 30 years. Depreciation expense, which is recorded on a straight-line basis, was $3.2 billion, $3.2 billion and $3.1 billion in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. 7. Multiclient Seismic Data The change in the carrying amount of multiclient seismic data is as follows: 44 8. Goodwill The changes in the carrying amount of goodwill by reporting unit were as follows: 9. Intangible Assets A summary of intangible assets follows: Customer relationships are generally amortized over periods ranging from 18 to 28 years, technology\technical know-how are generally amortized over periods ranging from 10 to 18 years, and tradenames are generally amortized over periods ranging from 15 to 30 years. Amortization expense was $354 million in 2015, $344 million in 2014 and $330 million in 2013. Based on the carrying value of intangible assets at December 31, 2015, amortization expense for the subsequent five years is estimated to be as follows: 2016: $373 million, 2017: $365 million, 2018: $357 million, 2019: $341 million and 2020: $319 million. 45 10. Long-term Debt and Debt Facility Agreements Long-term Debt consists of the following: (1) If the closing of the Cameron merger does not occur on or prior to August 25, 2016 (which may be extended to November 25, 2016 under certain circumstances) or if the Cameron merger agreement is terminated at any time prior thereto, these notes will be subject to a special mandatory redemption. The special mandatory redemption price will be equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the notes that are redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. ( 2 ) Schlumberger maintains a €5.0 billion Guaranteed Euro Medium Term Note program that provides for the issuance of various types of debt instruments such as fixed or floating rate notes in euro, US dollar or other currencies. Schlumberger issued €0.5 billion 1.50% Guaranteed Notes due 2019 under this program in the fourth quarter of 2013.  Schlumberger entered into agreements to swap these euro notes for US dollars on the date of issue until maturity, effectively making this a US dollar denominated debt on which Schlumberger will pay interest in US dollars at a rate equal to three-month LIBOR plus approximately 64 basis points. ( 3 ) Schlumberger entered into agreements to swap these dollar notes for euros on the date of issue until maturity, effectively making this a euro-denominated debt on which Schlumberger pays interest at a rate of 2.39%. Schlumberger Limited fully and unconditionally guarantees the securities issued by certain of its subsidiaries, including securities issued by Schlumberger Investment SA, a wholly-owned finance subsidiary of Schlumberger. At December 31, 2015, Schlumberger had separate committed debt facility agreements aggregating $3.8 billion with commercial banks, of which $1.4 billion was available and unused. This included $3.5 billion of committed facilities which support commercial paper programs in the United States and Europe, of which $250 million matures in July 2016, $1.75 billion matures in July 2018, and $1.5 billion matures in November 2018. Interest rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit vary from country to country. Commercial paper borrowings are classified as long-term debt to the extent of their backup by available and unused committed credit facilities maturing in more than one year and to the extent it is Schlumberger’s intent to maintain these obligations for longer than one year. Borrowings under the commercial paper program at December 31, 2015 were $2.4 billion, of which $1.0 billion was classified within Long-term debt and $1.4 billion was classified in Long-term debt – current portion in the Consolidated Balance Sheet .  At December 31, 2014, borrowings under the commercial paper program were $1.5 million, all of which were classified within Long-term debt in the Consolidated Balance Sheet . The weighted average interest rate on variable rate debt as of December 31, 2015 was 1.0%. Long-term Debt as of December 31, 2015, is due as follows: $1.5 billion in 2017, $2.6 billion in 2018, $0.9 billion in 2019, $1.6 billion in 2020, $2.7 billion in 2021, $1.9 billion in 2022, $1.5 billion in 2023 and $1.7 billion in 2025. 46 The fair value of Schlumberger’s Long-term Debt at December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014 was $ 14.4 billion and $ 10.7 billion, respectively, and was estimated based on quoted market prices. 11. Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities Schlumberger is exposed to market risks related to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. To mitigate these risks, Schlumberger utilizes derivative instruments. Schlumberger does not enter into derivative transactions for speculative purposes. Interest Rate Risk Schlumberger is subject to interest rate risk on its debt and its investment portfolio. Schlumberger maintains an interest rate risk management strategy that uses a mix of variable and fixed rate debt combined with its investment portfolio and occasionally interest rate swaps to mitigate the exposure to changes in interest rates. During the fourth quarter of 2013, Schlumberger entered into a cross currency swap for a notional amount of €0.5 billion in order to hedge changes in the fair value of Schlumberger’s €0.5 billion 1.50% Guaranteed Notes due 2019.  Under the terms of this swap, Schlumberger will receive interest at a fixed rate of 1.50% on the euro notional amount and pay interest at a floating rate of three-month LIBOR plus approximately 64 basis points on the US dollar notional amount. This cross currency swap is designated as a fair value hedge of the underlying debt.  This derivative instrument is marked to market with gains and losses recognized currently in income to largely offset the respective gains and losses recognized on changes in the fair value of the hedged debt. At December 31, 2015, Schlumberger had fixed rate debt aggregating $13.8 billion and variable rate debt aggregating $5.2 billion, after taking into account the effect of the swap. Short-term investments and Fixed income investments , held to maturity , totaled $10.7 billion at December 31, 2015. The carrying value of these investments approximated fair value, which was estimated using quoted market prices for those or similar investments. Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk As a multinational company, Schlumberger conducts its business in approximately 85 countries. Schlumberger’s functional currency is primarily the US dollar.  Approximately 83% of Schlumberger’s revenues in 2015 was denominated in US dollars. However, outside the United States, a significant portion of Schlumberger’s expenses is incurred in foreign currencies. Therefore, when the US dollar weakens (strengthens) in relation to the foreign currencies of the countries in which Schlumberger conducts business, the US dollar–reported expenses will increase (decrease). Schlumberger is exposed to risks on future cash flows to the extent that the local currency is not the functional currency and expenses denominated in local currency are not equal to revenues denominated in local currency. Schlumberger is also exposed to risks on future cash flows relating to certain of its fixed rate debt which is denominated in currencies other than the functional currency. Schlumberger uses foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency options to provide a hedge against a portion of these cash flow risks. These contracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges, with the effective portion of changes in the fair value of the hedge recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss. Amounts recorded in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss are reclassified into earnings in the same period or periods that the hedged item is recognized in earnings. The ineffective portion of changes in the fair value of hedging instruments, if any, is recorded directly to earnings. At December 31, 2015, Schlumberger recognized a cumulative net $39 million loss in Accumulated other comprehensive loss relating to revaluation of foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency options designated as cash flow hedges, the majority of which is expected to be reclassified into earnings within the next 12 months. Schlumberger is exposed to changes in the fair value of assets and liabilities which are denominated in currencies other than the functional currency. While Schlumberger uses foreign currency forward contracts and foreign currency options to economically hedge this exposure as it relates to certain currencies, these contracts are not designated as hedges for accounting purposes. Instead the fair value of the contracts are recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet and changes in the fair value are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Income as are changes in fair value of the hedged item.  Transaction losses of $27 million, $67 million and $24 million, net of related hedging activities, were recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Income in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. At December 31, 2015, contracts were outstanding for the US dollar equivalent of $3.8 billion in various foreign currencies, of which $1.2 billion relates to hedges of debt denominated in currencies other than the functional currency. 47 The fair values of outstanding derivative instruments are summarized as follows: The fair value of all outstanding derivatives is determined using a model with inputs that are observable in the market or can be derived from or corroborated by observable data. The effect of derivative instruments designated as fair value hedges and those not designated as hedges on the Consolidated Statement of Income was as follows: 12. Stockholders’ Equity Schlumberger is authorized to issue 4,500,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, of which 1,256,367,980 and 1,275,312,404 shares were outstanding on December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. Holders of common stock are entitled to one vote for each share of stock held. Schlumberger is also authorized to issue 200,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share, which may be issued in series with terms and conditions determined by the Board of Directors. No shares of preferred stock have been issued. 48 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss consists of the following: Other comprehensive loss was $352 million in 2015 and $1.652 billion in 2014.  Other comprehensive income was $1.334 billion in 2013. 13. Stock-based Compensation Plans Schlumberger has three types of stock-based compensation programs: (i) stock options, (ii) a restricted stock, restricted stock unit and performance share unit program (collectively referred to as “restricted stock”) and (iii) a discounted stock purchase plan (“DSPP”). Stock Options Key employees are granted stock options under Schlumberger stock option plans. For all stock options granted, the exercise price equals the average of the high and low sales prices of Schlumberger stock on the date of grant; the maximum term is ten years, and the options generally vest in increments over five years. The fair value of each stock option grant was estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model with the following weighted-average assumptions and resulting weighted-average fair value per share: 49 The follo wing table summarizes information concerning options outstanding and options exercisable as of December 31, 2015 : The weighted average remaining contractual life of stock options exercisable as of December 31, 2015 was 4.4 years. The following table summarizes stock option activity during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013: The aggregate intrinsic value of both stock options outstanding and stock options exercisable as of December 31, 2015 was $93 million, respectively. The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was $62 million, $314 million and $176 million, respectively. Restricted Stock Schlumberger grants performance share units to certain executives.  The number of shares earned is determined at the end of each performance period, which is generally three years, based on Schlumberger’s achievement of a predefined return on capital employed (“ROCE”), as defined in the underlying performance share unit agreement.  In the event the ROCE exceeds the predefined target, shares for up to the maximum of 250% of the target award may be granted.  In the event the ROCE falls below the predefined target, a reduced number of shares may be granted.  If the ROCE falls below the threshold award performance level, no shares will be granted.  As of December 31, 2015, performance share units of 0.9 million were outstanding based on the achievement of 100% of target. All other restricted stock awards generally vest at the end of three years. Restricted stock awards do not pay dividends or allow voting rights during the performance period.  Accordingly, the fair value of the restricted stock award is the quoted market price of Schlumberger’s stock on the date of grant less the present value of the expected dividends not received during the vesting period. 50 The following ta ble summarizes information about all restricted stock transactions: Discounted Stock Purchase Plan Under the terms of the DSPP, employees can choose to have a portion of their earnings withheld, subject to certain restrictions, to purchase Schlumberger common stock. The purchase price of the stock is 92.5% of the lower of the stock price at the beginning or end of the plan period at six-month intervals. The fair value of the employees’ purchase rights under the DSPP was estimated using the Black-Scholes model with the following assumptions and resulting weighted average fair value per share: Total Stock-based Compensation Expense The following summarizes stock-based compensation expense recognized in income: At December 31, 2015, there was $480 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested stock-based compensation arrangements, of which $215 million is expected to be recognized in 2016, $137 million in 2017, $80 million in 2018, $40 million in 2019 and $8 million in 2020. As of December 31, 2015, approximately 27 million shares of Schlumberger common stock were available for future grants under Schlumberger’s stock-based compensation programs. 51 14. Income Taxes Schlumberger operates in more than 100 tax jurisdictions, where statutory tax rates generally vary from 0% to 40%. Income from continuing operations before taxes subject to United States and non-United States income taxes for each of the three years ended December 31, were as follows: Schlumberger recorded pretax charges of $2.575 billion in 2015 ($883 million in the US and $1.692 billion outside of the US). Schlumberger recorded pretax charges of $1.773 billion in 2014 ($289 million in the US and $1.484 billion outside the US) and net pretax credits of $420 million in 2013 ($53 million of charges in the US and $473 million of net credits outside the US). These charges and credits are included in the table above and are more fully described in Note 3 – Charges and Credits . The components of net deferred tax assets (liabilities) were as follows: The above deferred tax balances at December 31, 2015 and 2014 were net of valuation allowances relating to net operating losses in certain countries of $162 million and $190 million, respectively.  Schlumberger generally does not provide income taxes relating to undistributed earnings, as the earnings either would not be taxable when remitted or are considered to be indefinitely reinvested. The components of Taxes on income were as follows: 52 A reconciliation of the United States statutory federal tax rate (35%) to the consolidated effective tax rate follows : A number of the jurisdictions in which Schlumberger operates have tax laws that are not fully defined and are evolving. Schlumberger’s tax filings are subject to regular audit by the tax authorities. These audits may result in assessments for additional taxes which are resolved with the authorities or, potentially, through the courts.  Tax liabilities are recorded based on estimates of additional taxes that will be due upon the conclusion of these audits.  Due to the uncertain and complex application of tax regulations, the ultimate resolution of audits may result in liabilities which could be materially different from these estimates. A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of liabilities associated with uncertain tax positions for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 is as follows: The amounts above exclude accrued interest and penalties of $176 million, $243 million and $253 million at December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.  Schlumberger classifies interest and penalties relating to uncertain tax positions within Taxes on income in the Consolidated Statement of Income . The following table summarizes the tax years that are either currently under audit or remain open and subject to examination by the tax authorities in the most significant jurisdictions in which Schlumberger operates: In certain of the jurisdictions noted above, Schlumberger operates through more than one legal entity, each of which may have different open years subject to examination. The table above presents the open years subject to examination for the most material of the legal entities in each jurisdiction. Additionally, it is important to note that tax years are technically not closed until the statute of limitations in each jurisdiction expires. In the jurisdictions noted above, the statute of limitations can extend beyond the open years subject to examination. 53 15. Leases and Lease Commitments Total rental expense was $1.6 billion in 2015, $2.1 billion in 2014, and $1.9 billion in 2013. Future minimum rental commitments under noncancelable operating leases for each of the next five years are as follows: 16. Contingencies Schlumberger and its subsidiaries are party to various legal proceedings from time to time. A liability is accrued when a loss is both probable and can be reasonably estimated. Management believes that the probability of a material loss with respect to any pending legal proceeding is remote. However, litigation is inherently uncertain and it is not possible to predict the disposition of any of these proceedings. 17. Segment Information Schlumberger’s segments are as follows: Financial information for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, by segment, is as follows: 54 Segment assets consist of receivables, inventories, fixed assets, multiclient seismic data and SPM investments. Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation of property, plant and equipment and amortization of intangible assets, multiclient seismic data costs and SPM investments. 55 Revenue by geographic area for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 and 2013 is as follows: Revenue is based on the location where services are provided. During each of the three years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, no single customer exceeded 10% of consolidated revenue. Schlumberger did not have revenue from third-party customers in its country of domicile during the last three years. Revenue in the United States in 2015, 2014 and 2013 was $8.5 billion, $14.0 billion and $12.0 billion, respectively. Fixed Assets less accumulated depreciation by geographic area are as follows: 18. Pension and Other Benefit Plans Pension Plans Schlumberger sponsors several defined benefit pension plans that cover substantially all US employees hired prior to October 1, 2004. The benefits are based on years of service and compensation, on a career-average pay basis. In addition to the United States defined benefit pension plans, Schlumberger sponsors several other international defined benefit pension plans. The most significant of these international plans are the International Staff Pension Plan and the UK pension plan (collectively, the “International plans”). The International Staff Pension Plan covers certain international employees hired prior to July 1, 2014 and is based on years of service and compensation on a career-average pay basis. The UK plan covers employees hired prior to April 1, 1999, and is based on years of service and compensation, on a final salary basis. The weighted-average assumed discount rate, compensation increases and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets used to determine the net pension cost for the US and International plans were as follows: 56 Net pension cost for 2015 , 2014 and 2013 included the following components: The weighted-average assumed discount rate and compensation increases used to determine the projected benefit obligations for the US and International plans were as follows: The changes in the projected benefit obligation, plan assets and funded status of the plans were as follows: 57 The unfunded liability represents the difference between the plan assets and the projected benefit obligation (“PBO”). The PBO represents the actuarial present value of benefits based on employee service and compensation and includes an assumption about fu ture compensation levels. The accumulated benefit obligation represents the actuarial present value of benefits based on employee service and compensation, but does not include an assumption about future compensation levels. The weighted-average allocation of plan assets and the target allocations by asset category are as follows: Asset performance is monitored frequently with an overall expectation that plan assets will meet or exceed the weighted index of its target asset allocation and component benchmark over rolling five-year periods. The expected long-term rate of return on assets assumptions reflect the average rate of earnings expected on funds invested or to be invested. The assumptions have been determined based on expectations regarding future rates of return for the portfolio considering the asset allocation and related historical rates of return. The appropriateness of the assumptions is reviewed annually. The fair value of Schlumberger’s pension plan assets at December 31, 2015 and 2014, by asset category, is presented below and was determined based on valuation techniques categorized as follows: 58 Schlumberger’s funding policy is to annually contribute amounts that are based upon a number of factors including the actuarial accrued liability, amounts that are deductible for income tax purposes, legal funding requirements and available cash flow. Schlumberger currently anticipates contributing approximately $350 million to its postretirement benefit plans in 2016, subject to market and business conditions. Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions Schlumberger provides certain healthcare benefits to certain former US employees who have retired.  During the fourth quarter of 2014 Schlumberger announced that, effective April 1, 2015, it will change the way it provides healthcare coverage to certain retirees who are age 65 and over.  Under the amended plan, these retirees transferred to individual coverage under the Medicare Exchange.  Schlumberger will subsidize the cost of the program by providing these retirees with a Health Reimbursement Account.  The annual subsidy may be increased based on medical cost inflation, but it will not be increased more than 5% in any given year. 59 The actuarial assumptions used to determine the accum ulated postretirement benefit obligation and net periodic benefit cost for the US postretirement medical plan were as follows: The net periodic benefit cost for the US postretirement medical plan included the following components: The changes in the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation, plan assets and funded status were as follows: The unfunded liability is included in Postretirement Benefits in the Consolidated Balance Sheet . The assets of the US postretirement medical plan are invested 60% in equity securities and 40% in debt securities at December 31, 2015. The fair value of these assets was primarily determined based on Level Two valuation techniques. 60 Assumed health care cos t trend rates have a significant effect on the amounts reported for the US postretirement medical plan. A one percentage point change in assumed health care cost trend rates would have the following effects: Other Information The expected benefits to be paid under the US and International pension plans as well as the postretirement medical plan were as follows: Included in Accumulated other comprehensive loss at December 31, 2015 are non-cash pretax charges which have not yet been recognized in net periodic benefit cost. The estimated portion of each component of Accumulated other comprehensive loss which is expected to be recognized as a component of net periodic benefit cost during the year ending December 31, 2016 is as follows: In addition to providing defined pension benefits and a postretirement medical plan, Schlumberger and its subsidiaries have other deferred benefit programs, primarily profit sharing and defined contribution pension plans. Expenses for these programs were $565 million, $749 million and $671 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. 19. Supplementary Information Cash paid for interest and income taxes was as follows: 61 During the fourth quarter of 2015, Schlumberger entered into an agreement with one of its customers to receive certain fixed assets in lieu of payment of approximately $ 200 million of accounts receivable . Interest and other income includes the following: The change in Allowance for doubtful accounts is as follows: Accounts payable and accrued liabilities are summarized as follows: 20. Discontinued Operations During the second quarter of 2013, Schlumberger completed the wind down of its operations in Iran and, therefore, classified the historical results of this business as a discontinued operation. In 2009, the US Department of Justice began an investigation into past violations of US sanctions regarding Schlumberger’s historical operations in Iran and Sudan that occurred between 2004 and 2010. During the second quarter of 2014, Schlumberger increased its accrual for this contingency.  Accordingly, Schlumberger recorded a $205 million charge, which was reflected within Loss from discontinued operations in the Consolidated Statement of Income during the second quarter of 2014. During 2015, Schlumberger resolved this investigation and a non-US subsidiary of Schlumberger pleaded guilty to one criminal count of conspiracy to violate the International Emergency Economic Powers Act. Under the terms of the plea agreement, Schlumberger paid approximately $233 million in fines, penalties and assessments during the second quarter of 2015, which had been previously accrued. This payment is reflected within Cash flows used in discontinued operations – operating activities in Schlumberger’s Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. 62 The following table summarizes the results of these discontinued operations: 63 Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Schlumberger management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rule 13a–15(f) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Schlumberger’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. Schlumberger management assessed the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015. In making this assessment, it used the criteria set forth in 2013 by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) in Internal Control—Integrated Framework. Based on this assessment Schlumberger’s management has concluded that, as of December 31, 2015, its internal control over financial reporting is effective based on those criteria. The effectiveness of Schlumberger’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015 has been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report which appears herein. 64 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Schlumberger Limited In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and the related consolidated statements of income, of comprehensive income, of stockholders’ equity and of cash flows present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Schlumberger Limited and its subsidiaries at December 31, 2015 and 2014, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2015 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015, based on criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission in 2013. The Company’s management is responsible for these financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express opinions on these financial statements and on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our integrated audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions. A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. 65 Quarterly Results (Unaudited) The following table summarizes Schlumberger’s results by quarter for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014. *     Mark of Schlumberger Item 9.  Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure. None. Item 9A.  Controls and Procedures. Schlumberger has carried out an evaluation under the supervision and with the participation of Schlumberger’s management, including the Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) and the Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”), of the effectiveness of Schlumberger’s “disclosure controls and procedures” (as such term is defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”)) as of the end of the period covered by this report. Based on this evaluation, the CEO and the CFO have concluded that, as of the end of the period covered by this report, Schlumberger’s disclosure controls and procedures were effective to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed in the reports that Schlumberger files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules and forms. Schlumberger’s disclosure controls and procedures include controls and procedures designed so that information required to be disclosed in reports filed or submitted under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to its management, including the CEO and the CFO, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. There has been no change in Schlumberger’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2015 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, Schlumberger’s internal control over financial reporting. Item 9B.  Other Information. None. 66 PART III Item 10.  Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance of Schlumberger. See “Item 1. Business – Executive Officers of Schlumberger” of this Report for Item 10 information regarding executive officers of Schlumberger. The information under the captions “Election of Directors,” “Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance,” “Corporate Governance – Director Nominations” and “Corporate Governance – Board Committees – Audit Committee” in Schlumberger’s 2016 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by reference. Schlumberger has a Code of Conduct that applies to all of its directors, officers and employees, including its principal executive, financial and accounting officers, or persons performing similar functions. Schlumberger’s Code of Conduct is posted on its website at www.slb.com/about/codeofconduct.aspx . Schlumberger intends to disclose future amendments to the Code of Conduct and any grant of a waiver from a provision of the Code of Conduct requiring disclosure under applicable SEC rules at www.slb.com/about/codeofconduct.aspx . Item 11.  Executive Compensation. The information set forth under the captions “Compensation Discussion and Analysis,” “Executive Compensation Tables and Accompanying Narrative,” “Compensation Committee Report” and “Director Compensation in Fiscal Year 2015” in Schlumberger’s 2016 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by reference. Item 12.  Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters. The information under the captions “Stock Ownership Information—Security Ownership by Certain Beneficial Owners,” “Stock Ownership Information—Security Ownership by Management” and “Equity Compensation Plan Information” in Schlumberger’s 2016 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by reference. Item 13.  Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence. The information under the captions “Corporate Governance—Board Independence” and “Corporate Governance—Policies and Procedures for Approval of Related Person Transactions” in Schlumberger’s 2016 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by reference. Item 14.  Principal Accounting Fees and Services. The information under the caption “Appointment of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm” in Schlumberger’s 2016 Proxy Statement is incorporated herein by reference. 67 PART IV Item 15.  Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules. Financial statements of companies accounted for under the equity method and unconsolidated subsidiaries have been omitted because they do not meet the materiality tests for assets or income. 68 SIGNATURES Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly caused this Report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized. Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this Report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the Registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated. 69 INDEX TO EXHIBITS 70 71 72